OCR of Lilith.pdf (70 pages). Tesseract eng, 2400x3200 page thumbnails.
Page numbers below are PDF page numbers. OCR may misread code and mathematical symbols.

===== PDF page 1 =====

ETH

| Eidgendssische Technische Hochschule
Zurich
_ institut fur Informatik

THE PERSONAL COMPUTER LILITH

BP osuallll |
_ Research institute
950 N University Avenue
(901) 378-7402

Reprinted by permission
Octebder 1983

===== PDF page 2 =====

Reproduced by permission.
CFB Software
www.cfbsoftware.com
December 2003

©) institut flir Informatik, ETH Zilrich 1981

Author's address:
N. Wirth
Institut flix Informatik
ETH-Zentrum
CH-68092 Ziirich

===== PDF page 3 =====

~jf =

Contents

1. Introduction 3
2. Project history and overview 4
3. Modules and interfaces in Modula-2 7
4. Coroutines and processes 16
§. The operating systes 14
6. Separate compilation of modules 7?
7. The architecture of the Lilith computer 19
8. The Lilith Instruction set ., 23
9. The Lilith hardware structure 24
1. The micro-controel unit 25
2. The arithmetic-legic unit 26
3. The memory 28
4. The instruction fetch unit 28
5. The Mouse 29
&. The Monitor 23
7. The physical leyout 39
18. Conclusions 31
Acknowledgements 32
References 33
Figures 34
Appendix 3: The M-code interpreter 56

Appendix 2: A benchmark test for
Modula-2 implementations — 65

The Personal Computer Lilith

Ath me eA i ai ir net

Abstract

The personal work station offers significant advantages over the
large-scale, central computing facility accessed via a terminal.
Among them are availability, reliability, simplicity of
operation, and a high bandwidth to the user. Modern technology
allows to build systems for high-level language programsing with
significant computing power for a reasonable price.

At the Institut fur Informatik of ETH we have designed and built
such & personal computer tailored to the language Modula-2. This
paper is a report on this project which encompasses language
design, developaent of «a compiler and a single-user operating
system, design of an architecture suitable for compiling and
ylelding a high density of code, and the development and
construction of the hardware. 28 Lilith computers are now in use
at eTu.

A principal theme ia that the requirements of software
engineecing influence the design of the language, and that its
factlities are reflected by the architecture of the computer and
the structure of the hardware. That the hardware should be
desiqned according to the programming language, Instead of vice-
versa, is particularly relevant in view of the current trend
towards VLSI technology.

===== PDF page 4 =====


===== PDF page 5 =====

-j-

1. Introduction

ee ee ee ee ie i

Seftware Engineering builds upon two pillars: methods and tools.
Their interrelation is strong. In order to apply new «methods
effectively, we need the appropriate tools. In order to build
supporting tools, we must master powerful methods. Much effort
has been spent on improving our methods, particularly in
Programming, and many discussions and conferences have been
devoted to the subject of furthering the state of the art by
applying more effactive methods. This includes @ tendency
towards the highly mathematical treatment of programaing, the
postulation of high-level languages for programming large
systems, the method of structured programming, and the
managerial aspects of organizing the work of programmers’ teams.

All of these areas are important; they form the part of a whole.
But perhaps none is as important as the adequate training of the
individual team number into a habit of systematic thinking. No
team can be successful without 311 Its members being trained to
regard programming as a highly logical and = = mathematical
activity. And the success of a mathematical treatment rests
largely on the use of an adequate notation, f.e. pragramming
"language". The designer of algorithnas alight be content with the
adequate notation and regard it as his only tool needed.
However, our subject at large is not the design of algorithms or
programs, but the design of machines. We must regard prograaming
as designing machinery, for programs turn *raw hardware* into
that machinery which fulfils the specified task.

Obviously a good notation must therefore be supported by an
excellent isplementation, just as a good mathematical Framework
for program design must be supported by an appropriate notation.
Moving one step further, the notation's implementation must be
suppotted by an appropriate computer system. The measure of its
quality not only includes aspects of computing power, cost-
effectiveness, and software support (the so-called = prograaaing
environment), but <slso a alaplicity and perspicuity of the
entise system, a convenfence to use the system, a high degree of
availability, and - on the more technical side - « high
bandwidth of information transfer between computer and .
Programmer. The latter aspects point in the direction of a |
personal work station in contrast to the remote, time-shared,
large-scale computing facility.

Fortunately, modern seniconductor technology has made it
possible to implement a modern programming language with
excellent support Facilittes on relatively small computers that
are very Inexpensive compared to conventional large computing
installations. The fact that the mechanises for sharing a
computer ~ and in particular that for protecting the users from
the alatakes of others - can be discarded, ceduces a systen’s
complexity drastically, and thereby improves both its

===== PDF page 6 =====

rellability and pecspicuity. The possibliity to implement
modern, high-level languages on relatively small non-shared
computers was perhaps the most significant “discovery” during
the last five years. A personal computer, programmable in such 4
language, canstitutes, in my opinion, a necessary tool for the
creative software angineer of the future.

2. Project history and overview

sr Heh 0 mn HP th HE le RSH SD HY SS

The decision to design and build 4 personal computec as
motivated above was made in the fall of 1977, after the author
had learned to appreciate the advantages of working with an Alto
computer [1]. The project included the followlng principal pacts
{2):

~ design of the programeing language Modula-2.

~ implementation of &@ multipass compiler suitable for relatively
small computers.

- Gevelopment of a basic, single-user operating system,
including a file system and a Linking loader.

~ design and implementation of s modern, flexibie text editor
taking full advantage of the computer's capabilities.

~ lapiesentation of a set of basic utility programa for file
directory inspection, copying, canaming, deleting, end listkng

les.

- programming and implementing an appropriate set of library
modules for file handling, access to peripheral devices - in
particular the display ~ and storage management.

- designing a suitable machine architecture as ideal interface
between compiler and hardware, and Programming this
architecture in alcrocode.

- design of the hardware capable of efficiently interpreting the
microcode and supporting the desirable peripheral devices,

- building two prototypes of the designed hardware, and
modifying them according to Insight gained = from the
concurrent development of hard- and saftware.

- building a series of 28 computers, debugging and testing them.

- welting documentation and ussr manuals.

The language Modula-2 - the notation in which this system
presents itself to the software engineer - was designed as a
general system programming language [3]. The guiding principle
was that this lanquage would be the only language available on
the computer. Especially, no assembler would be available, and
hence, the language should be suitable for both high-level
programming in a machine-independent manner and low-level
programming of machine-particular aspects, such as device
handling and = storage allocation. In Eact, the entire cperating
System, the compiler, the utility programs, and the libcary
modules are programmed exclusively in Modula-2.

===== PDF page 7 =====

The complier is subdivided into four parts. Each part processes
the output of its predecessor in sequential fashion and is
therefore called a pass. The first pass performs lexical and
syntactic analysis, and it collects identifiers, allocating them
in a table. The second pass processes declarations, generating
the so-called symbol tables that are accessed in the third pass
to perform the type consistency checking in expressions and
statements. The fourth pass generates code. Its output is called
M~code. .

The operating system is conceived according to the concept of an
*“open® system [4]. It is divided into three principal parts,
namely the linking loader, the file system, and routines for
keyboard input and text output on the display. The File system
maps abstract files (sequences of words or characters) onto disk
pages and provides the necessary basic routines for creating,
naming, writing, reading, positioning, and deleting files. Both,
leader and file system present themselves to the Madula-2
Programmer as modules (packages) whose routines can be imported
into any program. Whenever a program terminates, the basic
operating systes activates the command interpreter which
requests the file name of the next program to be loaded and
initiated.

The computer as “seen by the compiler® is implemented as a
sicroprogrammed interpreter of the M-code, The M-code is
designed with the principal goais of obtaining a high density of
code and of making the process of its generation relatively
systematic and straight-forward. Although space is definitely
the scarcer cesource than time, a high density of code is
desirable not only in the interest of saving memory space, hut
also for reducing the frequency of f{nstruction fetches. A
comparison between two different, but strongly related compilers
reveated that M-code is shorter than code for the PDP~11 by a
factor of almost &. This surprising figuce is clear evidence of
the inappropriate structure of *“canventionai” computer
instruction sets, including those of most modern microprocessors
that were Still designed with the human assembly language coder
nm mind,

The actual hardware consists of a central procesgzing unit based
on an Am2981 bit-slice unit, a multi-port memory with 128K words
of 16 bits, a micro-cade memory of 2k Instructions iaplemented
with PROMs, a4 controller each for the display, the disk, and a
local network, and interfaces for the keyboard, a cursor
teacking device called the mouse, and a V-24 (RS-232) serial
line interface. The central processor operates at a basic clock
cycle of 56 ns, the time required to interpret a micro-
instruction. The most frequently occuring M-cade instructions
correspond to about § micro-instructions on the average.

The display is based on the raster Scan technique using 594
lines of 766 dota each. Each of the 456°192 dots is represented

===== PDF page 8 =====

a

in main memory by one bit. Ff the entice screen ia fully used,
its bitdap occupies 26°SI2 words, f.e. 220 of memory. The
representation of each dot {picture element} in program
accessible sain memory makes the display equally suitable for
text, technical diagrams, and graphics in general. In the case
of text, each character is generated by copying the character's
bitmap into the appropriate place of the entice screen's bitmap.
This is done by software, supported by appropriate microcoded
routines, corresponding to special M-code instructions. This
solution, in contrast to hardware chacacter generators, offecs
the possibility to vary the chargacters* size, thickness
(boldface), inclination (italics} and even style. In shoct,
different fonts can be displayed. This feature, which is
Particularly attractive for text processing, requires a
Substantial amount of computing power to be avallable in short
bursts. The writing of a full screen, i.@. conversion of
characters from ASCII code to correctly positioned bitaaps,
takes about 1/4 second. Using a small font, a full screen may
display up to 19'809 characters.

The disk used in this personal computer is a Honeywell-Bull
D-12@ cartridge disk with a capacity of 18 MBytes and a
potential transfer rate of 728 kB/s, which cesults in an actual
rate of 6@ kB/s for reading or writing of sequential filles. Disk
Sectors, each containing 256 Bytes, are allocated in multiples
of 8 on the same track. Allocation {2s entiraly dynamic, and
hence fo storage contraction processes are needed to retrieve
"holes". The use of exchangeable cartridge disks in contrast to
sealed (Winchester) disks has been considered as essential ia
order that a work station may be used by different people at
different times without reliance on the existence of a network
and a centcal file store,

The mouse is a device that transmits signals to the computer
which represent the mouse's movements on the table. These
movements are translated {again by software) into a cursos
displayed on the screen. The accuracy of position is as high ss
the resolution of the screen, because the feadback from cursor
to mouse travels via the user‘s eye and hand. The souse also
contains three pushbuttons {keys} which are convenient for
giving commands while positioning the mouse,

The various principal parts of the projects were undertaken more
or less concurrently. The team consisted of @ {part tine) people
fn the average (not counting the production of 28 machines}, and
was small enough to require neither management staff nor
methods. The hardware was designed and built by three engineers
{including the author), two computer scientists built the
compiler, one the operating system, one laplemented the
microcode and most of the editor. The software effort was based
on the use of a PDP-11/48 computer {with 8 28K store) and was
initiated with the development of s compiler for Modula-2
generating code for the PDP-1l itself. This “preliminary”

===== PDF page 9 =====

compiler development constituted a significant part of the
entire software effort, and resulted in a valuable software tool
that had recently been released for distribution, 1t also made
the development of the Lilfth software quite independent Erom
the progress of the hardware. Both the Modula~2 compiler for -
code, the operating system, and even the highly display-oriented
editor were developed on the POP-11, and the subsequent
transport to the Lilith computer proved to be quite
unproblematic due to programming in. Modula-2. In fact, the
untested compiler was transported and debugged (at least to an
acceptable degree} in a few days only.

Whereas the software development could profit from our previous
experience in designing compilers and programming In general,
such was not the case in the hardware sector, as our institute
had neither hardware expertise nor fachlities. Ta gain
experience and develop such facilities was, however, a prime
challenge, and this project offered a welcome opportunity.

From the start it was planned to base the Lilith computer on the
2981 bit-slice processor, because one-chip processors avallable
in 1977 did not offer the computing speed required for the
efficient handling of the planned bitmap operations. This
decision proved to be a good one. After 15 months of
development, a First prototype was operattonal (without disk),
proved to be too unreliable for extensive use, but confirmed the
sensibility of the overall design. An additional year was needed
te produce two identical prototypes which served to test the
software that had been developed in the meantime. In the spring
of 980, a team was formed at the Department of Electrical
Engineering of Brigham Young University in Provo, Utah, to build
a series of 2@ Lilith computers. This goal was achieved within @
months by three graduating engineers and with the aid of student
employees during the summer months. The cost per unit, not
counting the development of the prototypes nor of organizing the
production effort, but including labor and parts, in particular
the 1@MB disk, was about SFr 28°86.

In the meantime, a few important application programs were
written at ETH, Including a text editor, an editor for drawing
circult diagrams, and a window handler module. Some sample
pictuces illustrating their use are shown in Fig 1. They are
printed with the same resolution as seen on the screen.

3. Modules and interfaces in Modula-2

ee ie Sy fy ap a kr OA mee ee oe ee ee oe

Perhaps the most important criterton of a language for
programming large systems is how well it supports pragram
modularization. The earliest facilities introduced for effective
progcam decomposition was the concept of locality, i.e. the
restriction of the validity of names {identifiers} to welli-

===== PDF page 10 =====

delineated parts of the program, such as a block or a procedure.
This concept was introduced by Algol 66 and adopted in Algol 68,
PL/I, and Pascal, among othecs. The range of validity is called
& name's scope. Scopes can be nested, and the rule fis thet names
valid in the scope‘s environment are also valid inside it,
whereas names declared within the scope are invisible outside.
This cule immadiately suggests a connection between the range of
visibility (scope) of a name within the program teut, and the
time of existence of the object associated with the name: as
$c0m a& control enters the acope (procedure, block), the object
must be created (e.g. storage must be allocated to a variable),
and as soon as it leaves the scope, the object can be deleted,
for it will no longer be visible. In spite of the tremendous
value of this locality concept, there are two ceasons why it is
inadequate for large programs.

- there Is a need to hide objects, i.e. to retain them while
they are invisible. This calis for s separation of visibility
and existence: visiblity as a property of names, existence as
a property of objects,

- there is a need for closer control of visibility, !.0. for
selection of particular names to be visible or invisible, in
contrast to the “inheritance" of the total environment into a
local scope.

In Modula-2, we have therefore added the structure af a sodule
to the structuce of the proceduce. Both structures appear
syntactically as alvwost identical, but are governed by different
rules about visibility of local names and existence of the
associated objects:

Pl. An object declaced local to a procedure exists only as lang
a8 the proceduce remains activated.

MI. An object local to a module exists as long a8 the enclosing
procedure remains activated.

P2. A name local to a procedure is Invisible outside the rext of
that procedure, one visible in the environment is also
visible inside the procedure.

M2. A name local to a module is visible inside the module, and
outside” tee, If it appears in the so-called export list in
the module heading. A name visible in a module's anvironment
is visible inside that module only ££ it appears in its so-
called import List.

From these rules, we can draw the following conclusion: A module
itself has no "existence", since its local objects inherit. their
lifetime from the module's environment (procedure}. Hence, the
module ig a purely syntactic structure acting like a wall
enclosing its local objects and controlling thelr visibility by
means of export and iaport lists. Modules therefore need not be
instantiated; there are no instances of a module. The module is
merely a textual unit.

===== PDF page 11 =====

~-9-

A typical example of a module is the fFallowing:

MODULE a;
EMPORT u,v}
EXPORT P.q:

VAR Ms wasnt
PROCEDURE p{...);
BEGIN ... M «+. END p;
PROCEDURE q{...)3
BEGIN ... K ..-. END q;
BEGIN 1... DW wee Meee
END ew

This module owns three local objects: variable x and procedures
p and q operating on x. [t exports p and q and hides x by not
exporting it. The body of the module serves to Inittalize x; it
is activated when the environment of m is activated (created).
This example is typical, because {t shows how an object x can be
hidden and haw access from outside is restricted to occur via
specific procedures. This makes it possible to guarantee the
existence of invariant conditions on x, independent of possible
errors in the environment accessing x via p and q. Such is the
very purpose of modularization.

The typical purpose of a module is indeed to hide s set of
interrelated objects, and the module is often identified by
these objects, e.g. a table handier hiding the table, a scanner
hiding the input streae, a terminal driver hiding the interface,
or a disk system hiding the disk‘s structure and allocation
strategy.

The module concept as described above had been Introduced with
the language Modula (5]. Modula~2 extends this concept in two
important ways, namely by

- qualified export mode, and
~ subdivision of a module into two textual parts, the so-called
deEinition and implementation parts.

Qualified expert serves to avoid clashes between identical
identifiers exported from different modules into the same
enclasing scope. If an identifier x is exported in qualified
mode from a module m, then the object associated with x needs to
be denoted as m.x. The qualified mode is therefore appropriate,
4€ the writer of m does not know the environment of m. This is
not the usual case for nested modules; individual members of a
programming team more typically design modules that lie on the
same level, namely the outermost, or global level (that may be
considered as being enclosed in a universal and empty scope). it
is this case that is particularly important in the design of
large systems, where a better separation of the specification of
import and export lists from the description of the actual

===== PDF page 12 =====

~ 18-

objects is desirable.

Consequently, we divide a global module into two parts. The
first is called a definition module; it containg the export list
and specifications of the exported objects as far as relevant
foc the user (client) of this module to verify the adherence to
language rules (in particular type consistency). A definition
module aiso specifies the types of its exported variables and
the parameter lists of its exported procedures. The aecond part
is called the implementation module. It contains (usually)
import lists and all the details that need not concern the
client, such as the bodies of procedures. The notlon of
textually separate definition and implementation parts was
pioneered by the language Mesa [6] and is here smoothly
integrated with the module concept of Modula.

Example:

DEFINITION MODULE B;
EXPORT QUALIFIED p,q;
PROCEDURE p(...);
PROCEDURE g{...)i

END B.

IMPLEMENTATIGN MODULE B;
FROM A IMPORT u,v;
VAR x: ...;
PROCEDURE p(...}7
BEGIN ... K «es U ee. END Pp;
PROCEDURE q{...)3
BEGIN eee Vi oes BR wes END qi
BEGIN 1... % ses
END B.

4. Coreutines and processes

te AOA he se em mm tH A eH reheat re rm: wm SH HL

With the design of the Lilith computer we did not follow the
fashionable trend to design a system consisting of several co-
operating Concurrent processors, thereby avoiding one certain
source of difficulties, namely their synchronization. the
consequence for the language Modula~2 was that the concept of
concurrent processes played a minor role only, whereas’ in
Modula-! it had been the major theme. The primary idea had been
to distinguish the logical process from the physical processor,
allowing implementations to choose theirs own mechanisas for
allocating processors to processes. Logical processes are served
by time-sharing the processors, which may well have different
characteristics and capabilities. The processes are implemented
as coroutines, and transfers of control between them are laplied
in statements that send signals or wait to receive signals,
where the signal Is an abstract notlon represented as a data
type. Each processor executes a sequence of coroutine segments,

===== PDF page 13 =====

and the processor scheduling can well be hidden behind the
primitive operations on signals. The principal difference
between processes (as in Modula~1)} and coroutines (as in Modula-
2) (Is that the latter are explicitly identified whenever a
transfer occurs, whereas processes are not, Since transfers are
ijmplied by sending a named signal to some process which remains
anonymous.

It is well fn accordance with the premise of Modula-2 - namely
to make primitives directly avallable to the programmer - to
include coroutines instead of processes, because the latter are
implemented by the former. As a consequence, Modula-2
implementations need no “run-time system" and no fixed, built-in
scheduling algorithe. There exists no data type Signal, but
instead transfer of control from a coroutine P to @ coroutine Q
{s specified explicitly by the statement TRANSFER(P,Q). Here P
and Q are variables of the primitive type PROCESS, whose actual
values are pointers to the coroutines’ workspace and state
descriptors.

Fucthermore, experience with Modula-! showed the advisability of
separating interrupt-driven from “regular” processes, because an
interrupt signals a tcansfer of service among processors within
the same process. A programmer may adopt this advice by
supplytng his own scheduling program. Modula-2 provides the
appropriate mechanism for encapsulating such a user-defined
scheduler in the form of its module structure. Naturally, such
algorithms may also be provided in the form of library sodules.

AS an example we list a scheduler reflecting the simple round-
robin algorithm. The module exports the data type Signal and the
operators StartProcess, Send, and Wait, which correspond to the
language facilities of Modula-1. The example excludes, however,
the treatment of intercupt-driven processes. (Note that the type
Signal is exported in opaque mode such that its structures is
invisible to the importer.) Both Send and Wait imply a coroutine
transfer. The primitive operation TRANSFER is, like the data
type PROCESS, imported from the module SYSTEM, which typically
contains low-level facilities. High-level programs should
preferrably rely on the process concept as presented by such a
ProcessScheduler module, rather than on named coroutines§ and
explicit transfer of control.

DEFINITION MODULE ProcessSceduler;
FROM SYSTEM IMPORT ADDRESS;
EXPORT QUALIFIED Signal, StartProcess, Send, Wait;

TYPE Signal;
PROCEDURE StartProcess({P: PROC; A: ADDRESS; n: CARGINAL});
PROCEDURE Send{VAR s: Signal};
PROCEDURE Walt{VAR s: Signal};
END ProcessScheduler,


===== PDF page 14 =====

~ 32 -

IMPLEMENTATION MODULE ProcessScheduler 3
FROM SYSTEM IMPORT PROCESS, ADDRESS, NWEWPROCESS, TRANSFER;

TYPE Signal = POINTER TO ProceaaDescriptor,;
ProcessDescripter =
RECORD ready: BOOLEAN;
pr: PROCESS,
next: Signal; ¢* cing *)
queue: Signal; {* waiting queue *)
END ;

VAR cp: Signal; {* current process *)}

PROCEDURE StartProcess{P: PROC; A: ADDRESS; n: CAADIWAL};
{* start P with workspace A of length na *}
VAR t: Signal;
BEGIN t := cp; MEW(cp};
WITH cp” DO
next rm t” next ready :* TRUE;
qué@ue := NIL; t".next := cp
END ;
NEWPROCESS(P, A, n, cp".pr); TRANSFER(t”.pc, cp” .pr)
END StartProcessa;

PROCEDURE Send(VAR s: Signal);
(* ‘vesume fiest process waiting for s *}
VAA t: Signal;
BEGIN
If s § NIL THEN
‘© 2* Cp; cp :* 83
WITH cp” bo
& t= queue; ready := TRUE; queue i+ NIL
END ;
TRANSPER(k* .pr, cp” .pr)
END
END Send;

PROCEDURE Wait(VAR s: Signal);
VAR c@, KI: Signal;
BEGIN (* insert current process in queue s *)
IF a = NIL THEN s := cp
ELSE t@ := #; ue ,
LooP ti :* té” queue;
IF ti = NIL THEN
ta" .queue i= cp; EXIT

END ;
te s= tlh
END
END ;

cp” .ceady := FALSE; cp*.quaue := MIL;
t@ := cp; (*now find next ready process*)

~

===== PDF page 15 =====

- 13 -

REPEAT cp := cp” .next;
If cp = t@ THEN HALT (*deadlock*} END
UNTIL cp” .ceady;
TRANSFER({ 8" .pr, cp” .pr)
END wait;

BEGIN WEW({cp) 3
WITH cp” DO
next := cp; ceady := TRUE; queve := NIL
END
END ProcessScheduler .

Interrupts are transfers of control that occur at unpredictable
moments. We can regard an interrupt as equivalent to a statement

TRANSFER(interrupted, interrupting)

that is effectively inserted {a the program wherever control
happens to be at the moment when the external interrupt request
is applied. The variable “interrupting” denotes the process that
ks destined to service the request, whereas the variable
"interrupted? will be assigned the interrupted coroutine. The
typical Interrupt handier is a device driver coroutine of the
following pattern; P and Q are variables of the primttive type
PROCESS.

PROCEDURE driver;
BEGIN initialization;
LOOP ...
start device; TRANSFER{QG,P}; ..-
END
END driver

the driver process is created by the primitive statement
NEWPROCESS (driver ,wap,n,Q)

which allocates the procedure “driver® and the workspace wsp of
size n to this coroutine, now identified by Q. It is
subsequently activated by tha statement

TRANSFER(P,Q)

which assigns the starting coroutine (e.g. the main program} to
P. After initiation of a device operation the statament
TRANSFER (Q,P}, which symbolically stands for that part of the
process which is executed by the device {4.e. another processor}
actually returns control to P and assigns (the current state of&)
the driver coroutine back to 9. Termination of the device
operation causes an interrupt signal which (iF enabled)
corresponds, as explained above, to an unwritten TRANSFER(P,Q).
This signal again switches control back From the interupted to

===== PDF page 16 =====

- 1@~-

the driver (interrupting) routine.

Each Iintercupt signal ~ the Lilith computer offers 8 of them -
is associated with its own variables P and Q at fixed locations.
In order that further intecrupts remain disabled while the
processor executes the interrupt routine, drivers are typically
declared inside a module with specified “pricrity* that causes
intercupct inhibition up to that specified "priority" level.

This elegant conceptual unification of coroutine transfers and
interrupt handling was made possible by an appropriately
designed computer architecture and Instruction sec.

5. The operating system

eee ee er eee eee ee ee ee

The most noticeable aspect of the Lilith operating system Mados
is its orientation towards a single user. It is devoid of any
protection mechanism against malicious programs that could
hamper another usec's program, Since Medos is programmed in
Modula, it benefits from the safety provided by Modula’s type
consistency and various run-time checks. Ita safety features are
“defensive*, but certainly not invulnerable, considering the
Modula's facilities for low-level programming offered toa the
brave programmer. In this regard, Medos follows the strategy of
Piloc (9). In a first, superficial look it can be regarded as a
collection of modules that ace imported by the cutrent program
(and its imported modules}. Since a number of low-level sodules
(such as the file system) are used by virtually every progran,
they form a cesident section. This set of modules consists of
three main parts;

“Progranm"™ - storage allocation, program loader
"Terminal" ~ drivers for keyboard and display
*FileSystem* ~ disk driver and file adainistration

The module Program exports the procedures.

Calltname,sharedHeap, status}
AllocateHeap(size)
DeallocateHeap{size)

of which the first effectively represents the loader. The nodule
administers the entice store as a stack and loads called
Programs sequentially. The remainder of the store is treated as
data store. In this part, the data stack grows from one end and
the heap from the other. The heap is used for variables that are
allocated d@ynaaically by calis of AllocateHeap and
DeallocateHeap, which merely move the pointer that denotes the
separation between date stack and heap. Moce sophisticated
allocators can be programmed which, however, will also refer to
these basic procedures.


===== PDF page 17 =====

=~ FR =

If a program PF calis the loader, the code and data segments of
the loaded module OQ {and of the modules imported by Q and not
already present) are stacked on top of those of P. The set of
seguents thus loaded forms a new “level®, one higher than that
of P. The loader operates as a coroutine, and each new level of
program is represented as a coroutine too. This silght misuse of
the coroutine Facility is justified by the convenience in which
new sections of data and program {a level} can be administered,
if described as a coroutine. Fig. 2. shows the storage layout and
the implied transfers of control when a program is loaded from a
caller at level 1.

The set of resident modules forms level @. Its main program is
called the Sequential Executive Kernel. It Invokes the loader
which loadsa the command interpreter. This is merely 4 program
that outputs a prompt character, reads a file name, and
transmits the file identity to the kernel, which loads this File
after the command interpreter has terminated and control is
returned to level @. Loading of the main program usually
requires the loading of further modules that are specified in
import lists. Linking or binding of modules is simplified by the
architecture of the Lilith computer such that it is performed
directly upon program loading. Fig. 3 shows a typical sequence
of programs, and how they occupy the store,

Since a program is loaded only after removal of the command
interpreter, and because the command interpreter typically has
ample time to process the siow Input from the keyboard, it can
be dezigned with additional sophistication. It can search the
file cable for program Files whose names match with the input so
far received and extend it as fac as {it is unambiguous. For
example, if File names ASCD snd ABCE are present, and no others
starting with A, it may display both names after receiving °A?"
and then allow continuation after receiving either Dor ©. This
is a small but typical example of providing a convenient user
intectace without additional burden on the user's program.

The entire mechanism for loading and allocating is programmed
exclusively in Modula-2; this includes the subtle pofnt of
changing our view of a program as data before to code after its
loading. In Modula-2, this is possible without resorting to
tricky programming and without the escape to small sections of
assembly code. ;

The second principa) part of the set of resident modules handles
input from the keyboard and output to the display. This module
is called Terminal. The input stream fetched by the procedure
Read (contained in Terminal) flows through a switch that allows
reading from a file instead of the keyboard, Because the command
interpreter also calls Read, that File can even be a command
file. The output stream, which is fed by calling the procedure
Write, is fed to the low-level module TextScreen that simulates
sequential writing and generates the bit pattern for each

===== PDF page 18 =====

- 6
Character according to a default font.

The module FileSystem constitutes the thicd major part of the
resident system. Filles are used for three main purposes:

~ long-term storage of data on permanent, named files,
- communication among programs,
- secondary storage of data on temporary, unnamed Elles,

We distinguish between the naming and abstract definition of
files ss extendable arrays of elements (FileSystem) and the
physical implementation of files on the disk (DiskSystem}). The

rogrammes refers to files through the module FileSystem which
fn turn calis procedures of the module DiskSystem hiding the
details of theirs physical cepresentation.

FileSystem exports the type File and operations on this type for
opening (creating), naming, reading, writing, modifying,
positioning, and closing files. Normally files ace regarded 4s
streams of either words or characters; writing occurs at the end
of the stream only, and if writing is requested at some position
other than the end, the file's tail is lost and deallocated.
Although it is also possible to modify files, i.e. overwrite
them, the abstraction of the stream is the preferred view af
files.

The module DiskSystem iaplements Files on the Honeyweli-Bull
D-12@ disk. It ig designed according to the follawing main
requirements:

fast access, in particular If strictly sequential,
robustness against hard- and software failures,
accommodation of a large number of {mostly short) files,
economical use of storage space.

eet

The follewing scheme was chosen as a compromise between the
various design objectives: Space is allocated in blocks of 2648
bytes. This results in a memory resident allocation table cf 392
words (one per cylinder), each bit indicating whether or not its
corcesponding block {is allocated to some file. Each block
corresponds to 8 disk sectors, equally spaced on the same
cylinder. A separate file, allocated at a fixed place, is called
FileDirectary and consists of flle descriptors. Every tile is
identified by the index of its {first} descriptor (= File
number), and each descriptor contains a table of addresses of
the blocks which constitute the file. Additionally, the
descciptor specifies various properties of the file, such as its
length, creation date, last modification date, wheather it is
permanent, protected, atc. Upon startup, the system reads the
entice FileDirectory and computes the allocation table.

Unnamed files are released either by closing them of when the

===== PDF page 19 =====

-~wW7-

System is started. They are used 48 temporary files during
execution of a program. For long term storage of data, a File
has te be named. To administer permanent files, the module
DiskSystem waintains another Elle (aise placed in a fixed
location) called the Name Directory. Each entry consists of a
file name and the number of the associated File. The procedure
Lookup(f,name,create}) is used to search the name in the Name
Directory and connects the file (if found) with the file
variable f. The parameter ‘“‘create* allows to ask for the
creation and naming of a new File, if the specified name was not
Found (see Flg. 4}.

A fourth, but effectivly hidden part of the resident system is
called the Monitor. [Tt contains two auxiliary processes that are
used to monitor the third, namely the main precess of the user.
The auxiliary processes are called Clock and Trap {Fig. 5}.
Clock is invoked 56 times per second. It updates a variable
called time, monitors the keyboard by polling, and buffers
keyboard input, allowing for typing ahead. .

Trap is invoked by varicus instructions detecting abnormal
conditions, such as stack overflow, arithmetic overflow, index
out of range, access to picture elements outside the specified
bitmap, the standard procedure HALT, etc. The Trap process then
may Store the state of the main process (essentially a dump} on
the disk for possible later inspection by a debugger program,
and restarts the main process at the kernel level.

Typing the control character <ctrloC is detected by Clock and
causes an abortion of the main process in the same manner as a
trap. Evidently, abnormal situations are here handled by
coroutine transfers instead of an additional exception facility
provided in the programming language. The auxilfary coroutine
then regards the aborted coroutine as data {instead of as a
Program} and is thereby able to reset it to a state where
continuation is sensible.

Fig. 6 shows the principal modules of Medos with arrows denoting
calls of procedures. Usually, these arrows are identical ta
those denoting the import/export dependences among modules.
Exceptions to this rule occur through the use of procedure
variables.

6. Separate compilation of modules

ee ee ee ee a ee ee a ee re er ee ee ee

For ceasons of convenience and economy, large system programs
need to be compiled in parts. [t is only natural that these
parts be the ones that from a logical point of view were
designed as relatively independent units. The module is the
obvious choice for the unit of compilation. Definition and
implementation modules are therefore called compilation units.

===== PDF page 20 =====

~ TR ~

The idea of compilation In parts is as old as Fortran and even
assembler code. In high-level ianguages with data types the
problem of partiai compilation is of considerable complexity: we
wish that type consistence checking is Fully maintained accross
module boundaries. In fact, experience has shown that this is
when it is most needed to avoid catastrophic errors. In order to
recognize inconsistencies such as type misaatches, incorrect
nugber or order of parameters, etc., a8 early as possible, they
must be detectable by the compiler. The compiler therefore must
have access to information about al] fmported objects. This is
accomplished as follows {7]}:

Assume that a module B depends on, i.e. imports objects from a
module A. Therefore, module A has to be complied first. During
its compilation, th compiler generates, apart from a code file
for A, a symbol file. Compilation of B subsequently accesses
that symbol file. More accurately, program & can - according to
the cules of the language - refer to information of A's
definition part only. Thus, the symbol file is an extcact only
of the information available during compilation of A. Since only
definition modules are capable of exporting, the symbol file is
the result of compiling the definition module A, while code fs
the result of compiling implementation {er program) acdules
only.

This scheme ~ in particular the separation of definition and
implementation parts - has important consequences foc the manner
in which systems are developed. A definition madule constitutes
the interface. between its implementation part and its clients.
Effectively the scheme forces the programmer to define
interfaces first, for, whenever a definition module is (changed
and) recompiled, all its importers {clients) have to be
recompiled too, However, it is possible to change and recoapile
implementation modules without that far-reaching and costly
consequence.

It should be noted that the consequences of this chronological
ordering of compilations are Less severe than aight be
anticipated due to the fact that the laporters are usually
implementation modules. Hence a change in a low-level module ~ a
module that resides low in the hierarchical chain of
dependencies - need not produce a chain reaction of
recompilation up toa all ultimate clients. The appropriate
decomposition of a planned system into modules is nevertheless a
most important aspect. of competent programming. Often the
decomposition has to be decided at an early stage when inaight
into many aspects of a system are still hazy. [Its success
therefore largely depends aon the engineer's previous experience
with similar tasks,

Learning how to deal effectively with a new facility offered by
a programming language [s # long-term grocess. The modula
facility forces the programmer team to make those decisions

===== PDF page 21 =====

~ 19 -

first that must be made first {8}. One lesson learned so far Is
that a module typically centers around a data structure, and
that fit is this data structure rather than the exported
operations that characterize {t.

7. The architecture of the Lilith computer

ee eT

One of the challenges tn designing a computer lies in finding a
structure and an instruction set which yield a high density of
code and ai relatively simple algorithm for code generation. A
premise of this project was that the computer had to be designed
according to the language in which it was ta be programmed. This
resulted in a quite unconventional architecture. No attempt was
made to make the Instruction set suitable for "hand coding"; in
fact, programming in machine code would be quite cumbersone,
even if an assembler were available.

The Lilith computer is based on a stack architecture, Stack
computers are by no means novel as such. Their history dates
back to the early 68s with the English Electric KDP9 and the
Burroughs 85986 as ploneers. The Lilith architecture adopts the
stack principle without compromise, and its instruction set is
chosen to obtain a high density of code requiring only straight-
forward algorithms for instruction selection. The code is a byte
stream. Each Instruction consists of one or several bytes. The
high density is achieved not only by implicit addressing of
intermediste results in expressions, but mainly by the provision
of different address lengths and suitable addressing modes. In
order to explain these modes, we need to inspect the overall
storage organtzation at run-tlme. In contrast to earlier stack
computers, not only procedures play an important role, but also
wodules. The underlying premise is that objects local to the
lecation of the present computation are accessed most fequently
- and therefore require fast access by short instructions -
whereas access to cemote objects Is relatively rare and requires
less efficiency, Fast access is obtained by retaining
"intermediate results” of address computations in fast registers
(base address), in the expectation that they willl be reused
Frequently, and that thereby their recomputation can be avoided.
Several base address registers are used in the Lilith computer.

The origin of «s11 address computations is a table with base
addresses of all currently loaded data frames (see Fig. 7). A
data frame is a contiguous area of store allocated to the
{static} varfables of a given module. By “module” we refer here
and subsequently to compilation units; this excludes inner
inested) modules. Each loaded module has a number which is used
as index toa that FErame table. The table resides at a fixed
location and has a fixed length. The entry belonging to the
module of which code is executed currantly, is retained in the
base address register G. It is the base address of "Global

===== PDF page 22 =====

=» 26 -

variables* in the sense of Algol of Pascal. G has to be reloaded
whenever control transfers from one wmodule to another. Data
frames are static in the same sense that they sre "“pecmanent”
for the duration of a program execution, with the (rare)
exception of overlays performed by calls of the leader.

Data local to procedures are allocated in a stack which grows
when 3 procedure is called and shrinks when it is terminated.
Each coroutine {process} {is allocated an area of the store,
called ai stack frame, when it is started, and which serves as
the caroutine's workspace. The base address of the stack frame
belonging to the coroutine currently under axecution is stored
in the register P, that of the last location allocated in this
gtack frame In rcegister S, and the end of the workspace is
designated by register H. P is used when a transfer from one
coroutine to another coroutine occurs, S when a procedure is
called or terminated. Each stack frame contains the hiercacchy of
data segments representing the variables local to the activated
procedures. They are Linked by the so-called dynamic chain of
procedure activations. The base address of the last segment
Created is retained in cegister L (foc Local data).

Local data are semi-dynamic in the sense that they are allocated
for the duration of a procedure activation only. However, thair
addresses are determined by tha compiler as offsets relative to
the base address of thelr owner. Truly dynaaic data are those
allocated by explicitly programmed statements in an area of the
stoce called heap. This storage area is managed by a utility
module called Storage; these variables ace accessed via pointer
values. As in Pascal, pointers ace bound to a given type,
providing additional security in pointer handling.

Each loaded module owns a data Frame and also a code frame, @
contiguous area of store containing the code of al] tts
procedures. The base address of the code frame of the currently
executing module is retained in cagister F. Its value is used
when calling a procedure, which is identifled by a number used
as index to a table containing the starting addresses of ali
procedures in a given module. This table resides in the headex
of the code frame. Using such an index Instead of absolute
addresses contributes to higher code density, particularly slace
procedure calls are vary frequent instructions. The value of
cregister F is changed whensver contro} transfers between
modules, Jump addresses ara relative to the F-register value.

&. The Lilith instruction set

Se ed

Instructions consist of one of several bytes, They can be
divided into four basic categories: Load and store Enstructions,
operators, control instructiona, and miscellaneous finatcuctions:

===== PDF page 23 =====

~~ 21 -

The load and store instructions transfer data between memory
(stack or teap) and the top of the stack, where they are
accessed by operators. The top of the stack, where data are
loaded a8 intermediate results (anonymous varlabies) is also
Galied the expression stack. Load or store instructions rcequire
4 Single address only bacauvse the stack address is implicit;
they are further subdivided according to the following criteria:

~ data size: the transferred data are a word {16 bits), a double
word, or a byte (halfword). *

- addressing mode: local, global, external, stack, indexed, and
immediate mode {the latter for load instructions only).

~ address length: 4, 8, oc 16 bit address (see Fig. 8).

The presence of different address lengths suggests that
variables with frequent access be allocated with small offsets,
Our present compiler does not perform any such optisization. The
gain to be made does not appear to be overwhelming. The set of
divectly accessed (statically declared} variables is usually
quite small, because structured variables are addressed
indirectly.

The various addressing modes are defined as follows {(m and nh
denote instruction parameters, and a the resulting address):

~ Local mode: a = Len, used For variables local to procedures.

- Global mode; a = Gtn, used for global variables in the current
aodule.

~ Stack mode: a = gin, where s is the value on top of the stack;
mode used For indirect addressing and access via pointers.

~ External mode: a = T(mjtn, fT %$is the table of data frame
addresses, m a module number; mode used for external variables
imported from other modules.

~ Indexed mode: a = 51 + k*s2, 51 ig the array's base address,
S2 the computed index {s!, s2 on stack}, and k is a multiplier
depending on the size of the accessed data type.

~ Immediate mode: a =n, The loaded vaiue is the parameter
itself; mode used to generate constants.

The above explanations are given in this detall in order to show -
that the constructs defined in the programming language are
Strongly reflected by, i.e. have directly influenced, the design
of the Lilith architecture. The beneficlal consequence is not
only ease of compilation, but simplicity of the Linking loader.
Whereas our Modula-2 system for the PDP-11 computer for good
reasons requires a linker, such its not necessary for the Lilith
implementation. A linker collects the code Files of all required
modules and links them together into an absolute for
relocatable) store image. This task can be performed directly by
the loader, because it only has to Insert module numbers (table
indices) in instructions with external addressing mode.

The second category of instructions are the operators, They take

===== PDF page 24 =====

- 22 ~-

operands from the top of the stack and replace them by the
result. The Lilith instruction set includes operators for
CARDINAL {unsigned}, INTEGER (signed), double-precision,
floating-point, BOOLEAN, and set arithmetic. tt directly
raflects the operations avallabie in Modula~2.

The orientation towards a clean stack architecture also required
a full set of comparison Instructions which generate a BOOLEAN
result. Distinct sets are provided for CARDINAL and INTEGER
comparison, The distinction between CARDINAL and INTEGER
arithmetic is partially due to the desire to be able ta use ail
bits of a word to represent unsigned numbers, such as addresses.
It would be of a lesser importance, if the wordsize were larger.
However, our experience shows that it is desicable also Erom a
purely logical point of view to declare variables to he non-
nagative, if in Fact a negative value does never occur. Most of
Our programs require variables of the type CARDINAL, whereas the
type INTEGER occurs only rarely. Although using 2's complement
representation for negative values, addition and subtraction are
impiemented by the same hardware operations for hoth kinds cf
acithmetic, they differ in thelr conditions indicating overflow.

Control instructions include procedure calls and jumps.
Conditional jumps are generated for IF, WHILE, REPEAT, and LOOP
Statements. They fetch their BOOLEAN operand from the stack.
Special control instructions mirror the CASE and FOR statements.

Different calls are used for procedures declared in the cucrent
module and for these in other modules. For local procedures
there exist call instructions with short 4-bit addresses, as
they occur rather frequently. Calls for external procedures not
only inchude an address parameter, but also a acdule number to
be updated by the loader. Furthermore, an instruction is
provided for so-called formal prosedures, f.e. procedures that

are either supplied as parameters of assigned to procedure
variables,

There alsa exists an instruction for the transfer of control
between coroutines. Various instructions may cause a trap, if
the result’ cannot be computed. Such a trap is considered like an
interrupt requested by the processor itself, and corresponds to
a coroutine transfer with fixed parameters. The same mechanisa
is activated by the TRAP instruction (which corresponds to a
HALT statement in Modula).

Arithmetic operators generate traps when unable to compute the
correct rasult (e.g. overflow). Traps from CARDINAL and INTEGER
arithmetic can be suppressed {masked) upon request; the
programmer is then presumably aware that results are computed
modulo 2°16. Also, lead and stare instructions generate a trap,
if theic address is NIL. Thia test requires a single alcro
tnstruction only. The routines for biteap handling generate
traps, if’ attempting to access data outside the specified

===== PDF page 25 =====

- 23 -

bitmap. All these test are quite inexpensive (but not free).

A test for an array index lying within the specified bounds, or
for a value ta be within the subrange admitted by a variable, Is
more complicated. It requires two comparisons with arbitrary
values. Therefore, the M-code contains an instruction for an “in
range” test. The programmer may choose to omit these tests by
selecting a compiler option that suppresses the generation of
these test instructions.

These extensive checking Facilities reflect our strong belief in
designing an tmplementation (including the hardware) which
properly supports a language's abstractions. For example, if the
language provides the data type CARDINAL, its implementations
should signal an error, if a negative result appears, just as [ft
should signal an error, when a non-existing element of an array
is identified. Omissions in this regard are ta be considered as
inadequacy in implementation. Nevertheless, the argument whether
oF not the experienced and conscientious programmer should be
burdened with these “redundant® checks remains open. Our choice
is to give the programmer the option to suppress at least the
more expensive checks, at his own peril.

The category of miscellaneous instructions contains operators
for ceading and writing data on the input/output channels, and
four instructions used for operating on bitmaps: The DDT
instruction (display dot) writes a single dot at aie specified
coordinate, REPL replicates a bit pattern over a rectangle - a
so-called block - in a given bitmap, The coordinates of this
block are relative to the specified bitmap and are given in
terms of dot coordinates rather than word addresses, The BBLT
instruction {bit Block transfer) copies a source block into a
destination block. The DCH instruction (display character)
coples the bitmap of a character {given its ASCII code) from a
font table into a specified place of a bitmap.

The function of these bitmap instructions could well be coded in
Modula-2 prograas. Instead, they are included as single
instructions represented by micro-coded routines. The primary
reason is efficiency. The routines include checks against
inconsistent parameters, such as blocks that do not fully Lie
within the bltmap. An essential detail is that they use the same
convention about parameters as do regular procedures and
operators: parametecs are always passed via the stack.. Modula-2
for Lilith offers a facility to use these instructions as if
they were programmed as regular procedures. This uniformity of
parameter passing has proved to be an invaluable asset.

Some analysis of representative programs reveals that M-code
yields ai significantly higher density of compiled code than do
conventional instruction sets. Compared with the code compiled
for the ublquftous PDP-11, we obtained an improvement factor of
3.9. This implles that code for the same program occupies about

===== PDF page 26 =====

~ 24 -

one quarter of the memory space in the Lilith computer than in a
PDP-11. This factor is noteworthy even in times of rapidiy
decreasing meaory prices}

The principal centribution to this result stems From the short
address fields. Oominant are the counts of Joad and store
instructions; they address the stack implicitly and hence need
only one address field. Access to local variables is most
frequent; global variables are addressed about half as often,
and external vaciables occur rarely. Jumps account for about
Wat of all instructions, and procedure calis are about equally
frequent. The following table displays percentage figures
obtained from four programs {of different authors) for the most
frequent instruction classes.

I-byte instr. 78.2 71.7 62.8 72.5
2-byte instr. 16.6 17.3 12.6 12.8
3-byte instr. 13.1 11. 24.5 15.4
Load immediate 15.3 14.2 17.3 15.2
Load local 16.3 24.6 16.3 19.3
Load global 6.2 $.2 3.7. 7.9
Load indirece 5.2 6.4 §.5 §.8
Store local 5.8 6.5 5.8 6.@
Store global 2.6 1.1 1.6 3.3
Store indirect 4.2 3.8 i.) 4.3
Operators 5.6 5.7 4.8 5.9
Comparators 3.9 4.4 5.6 3.7
Jumps 7.3 7.7 9.3 6.2
Calls 6.4 a.1 14.5 6.9
Total counts (1008) 11852 7378 7936 2634

instructions are executed by a micro-coded program called the
Interpreter, which may well he expressed in Modula; this
algorithmic definition of the Lilith instruction set has proved
to be extremely valuable as interface between the msicro-
programmer and the compller designer.

9. The Lilith hardware structure

see eee eee ee eee ee ee eo

The following requirements determined the design of the hardware

most significantly:

~ fast implementation of the M-code interpreter, in particular
of tits stack architecture,

- the need for efEicient implementation of the bitmap
instructions which involve a large amount of bit pushing and

===== PDF page 27 =====

~ 25 o

partial word accesses (bit addressing). :
~ high bandwidth between memory and display for continuous
refreshing.
~ the desire for a simple structure with a relatively large,
homogencus store,
- ease of serviceabibity. ,
The computing power required by the bitmap Instructions
eliminated the choice of a one~chip processor. An even stronger
reason against such a choice was the project's purpose to find a
hardware architecture truly suitable for use with cede compiled
from a high-level language. The bit-slice processor Am2908)
oftEered an ideal solution between a one~chip processor and the
complete design of a unit built with SSI and MSI components. It
allows for a basic instruction cycle that is about a fourth of a
memory cycle (158 ns}. This is a good relation considering the
average amount of processing requiced between memory accesses,

The processor is built around a 16-bit wide bus connecting the
arithmetic-logic unit {ALU) with the memory for transfer of data
and addresses. Also connected are the instruction fetch unit
(IFU), the disk and display controllers, and the interfaces to
the standard low-speed 1/0 devices keyboard, Mouse, and serial
¥24 > «(RS232)} bine. Bus sources and destinations are specifted in
each emicro~instruction by 4-bit flelds which are directly
decoded. The bus uses tri-state logic.

The refreshing of the full screen requires a signal with a
bandwidth of 13 MHz, 1€ interlacing and as rate of 58 half
Pictures per second is assumed. This implies that on the average
one 16-bit word has to be fetched every 1.1 us, which implies
that memory would be available to the processor about 58% of the
time. This unacceptably low rate calls for a memory with an
access path wider than 16 bits. It was decided to implement a
64-bit wide memory.

A thied candidate for direct memory access is the instruction
Stream. Like the display, this port requires sequential reading
only and therefore can benefit from a wide access path feeding
an internal buffer. This organization reduces the average time
that the memory is devoted to display and instruction fetching,
i.e. where it {s inaccessible to the data port of the main
processor, to about 1@%, The overall structure of the Lilith
hardware js shown in Fig. 9. Its heart is the microcontrol unit ,
{MCU} which contains the clock and controls the instruction
stream,

9.1 The micro-control unit

et te ae ee Oe ee ee ee

The micro-control unit (MCU) consists primarily of a memory for
the microcode, &@ micro- instruction register (MIR}, an address
inceementer, and some decoding logic. A micro- instruction

===== PDF page 28 =====

-~ 26 -

Consists of 48 bits; its formats are shown in Fig. 18. The
micro-instruction address is a 12 bit integer, hence the memory
may have at most 4K locations. Actually, only 2K are used and
Implemented as a cead-only store (ROM). An additianal 2K RAM may
be supplied. Approximately 1K is used by initialization routines
(bootstrap loader) and the M-code interpreter, and 1K is needed
for the bitmap routines and the floating-point iastructions.

Fig. 11 shows the structure of the aicra-control unit. The next
instruction's address is taken from one of several sources:

the incrementer (normal case)

an address stack (subroutine return)

the current instruction (microcode jump)

a table of addresses of routines which correspond to M-codes
according to a pending interrupt request.

it ¢ ie

The addresses are generated by Am291} bit-slice controllers
which contain an incrementer and a short stack for subroutine
return addresses. For jumps, the next address is supplied from
Sources external to the 2911. Conventional jumps take the
address directly from the instruction register (MIR). Exceptions
are the jumps to the start of the microcode routine representing
the next M-~-code instruction. Here the address is taken from a
ROM which maps the &<bit M-code into a 12-bit address. This
exception is signalled by a micro~instruction whose source field
Value causes the address to be selected from the map ROM. An
exception to this exception occurs if an (unmasked) Interrupt
request is pending, in which case the next address is the fixed
number assigned to the requesting line. Thereby the M-code
Sequence can be interrupted without requiring any additional
micro-instructions, and the transition to the next emicro~
instruction routine is initiated by a single instruction at the
end of each routine.

A tag bit of each micro-instruction determines whether it is to
be interpreted as a reqular ar as a jump insteuction. During
execution of the latter the main processor ia disabled. Jumps
are conditional upon the state of the aain processor’s condition
code ceqgister determined by the ALU‘s result computed during the
Previous cycle.

9.2 The arithmetic logic unit

eH eR A a a er SY a pr tO a

The ALU‘s heart is a 2981 bit-slice processor. It contains the
legic for integer arithmetic (addition) and foe bit-parallel
logical operations, and a set of 16 fast registers. Half of them
are used for global state variables of the M-code interpreter,
the others as work cegisters local te each sicrocede routine.
The 2981 core is augmented by two fachlities dictated by the
requirements of the stack architecture and by the bitmap
toutines: a East stack memory and a barrel shifter (Fig. $2).

===== PDF page 29 =====

-~ 27 -

The fast stack is a store of 16 locations (16 bit wide} and = an
address incrementer/decrementer. This memory holds the
intermediate results during evaluation of expressions and
Statements, and must be regarded as logically being part of the
{main} stack, but physically separate. Load instructions fetch
data from the (main) stack in memory and push them onto the fast
expression stack. Store instructions pop the expression stack
and deposit data in main memory. As a consequence, each such
instruction takes a single main memory cycle only. More
precisely, data loaded from and stored Into the main stack are
transferred to and from a register In the 2941 processor itself,
while during the same cycle this T-register is saved {or
restored) into (from) the expression stack:

Load: push T onto stack; Bus -> T
Store: T -> Bus; pop stack into T

Operations such as addition, comparison, AND, OR, etec., can also
be performed in a single cycle, because beth operands are
immediately accessible:

Add: T + top stack -> Tj; pop stack

The hardware represents a genuine stack in so far as the cufrent
stack top is the only accessible element, and that its address
is ftnaccessible to the programmer. This address is generated by
a 4-bit up/down counter and directly fed to a 16x16 high-speed
RAM. A slight complication arises because address incrementatian
for a pop must occur before the data fetch, whereas the
decrementing for a push must occur after the store. However,
both address counting and data access must be performed during
the same clock cycle. The solution is found in using an extra
adder and to operate according to the Following scheme:

push: DEC(x}; S{x+t) := data
pop: INCix); data :* S{[x]

The circuit of the entire stack mechanism is shown tn Fig. 13.
it may be surprising that the fast stack has a depth of only 16.
In practice, this proved to be ample. It should be noted that
the compiler can keep track of the number of stack locations
loaded, and hence no runtime stack overflow can occur, nor need
it be monitored, The stack is empty after execution of each
Statement. In the case of function procedures, the expression
stack has to be saved into the main stack before, and restored
after the cali. Special M-code instructions are provided for
this purpose,

The barcel shifter is prefixed to the input lines of the 2981
processor. %t allows the rotation of data by any number of bit
positions between @ and 15. Together with the logical
instructions (AND, OR) ‘it provides the necessary speed for
partial word handling extensively used in a11 bitmap operations,

===== PDF page 30 =====

- 28 -

It is designed such that it can also generate masks of @ to 15
bits in one cycle. The shift count (mask length) can either be
taken from a field in the micro-instruction itself, of from a
special 4-bit shift count cegister, also contained in the ALU.

9.3. The memory

The memory is built with 16K dynamic RAM chips distributed on
four boards, each being organized as a 16K*%32 block. For
ceading, 32 bits are accessed simultaneously from two of the
four boards. Multiplexors select 8 of the 32 bits for output to
the processor bus via the so-called CPU port. For writing, the
Same connection is used, and the data are fed to four chips in
parallel, of which only one is enabled through the chip select
signal. Fig. 14 shows the scheme for two boards; together they
represent a 64K*16 bit memory for writing, of a J6K*64 bit
memory for reading..

The choice of a 64-bit wide access path guarantees the necessary
memory signal bandwidth, but it also poses significant
electrical problems that should not be undecestimated. Their
mastery is an order of magnitude more difficult than the
handling of conventional 8-bit microcomputer systems.

Processor and display operate asynchronously. Hence, an arbiter
mechanism is needed for controlling memory access. It can easily
be extended to accommodate several instead of only two ports.
Each port is assigned a fixed priority, and the request from the
source with highest rank among those pending is honoured. Fig.
15 shows the circuit used; it contains cascaded priority latches
that cetain posted requests. Also shown is the circuit used for
the synchronization of a requestor (the CPU port as an example)
and the memory, which operate on separate clocks. The priority
latch is common to all ports, the other parts are individually
replicated for each port. Fig. 16 shows the signal timing: If
the port requests a memory cycle, the bus data, representing an
address, are latched in the memory address register MAR, the
port is marked busy, and the request is passed on to the
arbitec. Unless a request with higher priority is present, the
signal CPU.SEL goes high, indicating that the memory cycle now
Started belongs to the CPU port and MAR is gated to the address
lines. When terminated, the signal CLR resets the busy latch,
indicating to the polling CPU that its request has been served.

9.4. The Instruction fetch unit

Instcuctions are fetched via a separate memory port controlled
by the instruction fetch unit (IFU). This unit contains its own
address registers (PC,F) and an 6-byte buffer. The buffer can be
cegarded as a small cache memory and is particularly effective
because access is mostly sequential. Reloading occurs when

===== PDF page 31 =====

- 29 -

either the buffer is eapty, or when a new address is fed to the
PC by a control instruction. The IFU contains its own address
incrementer {the PC register is a counter) and an adder forming
the sum of the PC and F values. This adder is 18 bits wide. A
byte is fetched from the buffer and the address is incremented

whenever the micro-controller executes a jump enabling the map .

ROM. Fig. 17 is a block diagram of the IFU.

ae ee eee

The Mouse ts a device to designate positions on the display
screen. It operates on the principle that movements of the
operator's hand on his desk are sensed, rather than on the
recording of precise, absolute coordinates. A cursor is
displayed (by appropriate programming) on the screen, changing
its position according to the signals received from the Mouse.
Hence, positioning of the cursor can be as accurate as the
display's reselution allows, without reguiring a high-pracision
digitizer device, The Mouse is also equipped with three
pushbuttons {eyes) ar.i is connected to the keyboard by a thin
tail; hence its name.

The movements are transmitted via a ball to two perpendicular
wheels, whose “spokes” are seen by a light sensor. The direction
of their turning is perceived by sampling two signals received
from spokes which are offset. If we combine the two binary
signals and represent them as numbers to the base @, the wheels‘
turning results in sample value sequences 8,2,3,1;@, «2. oF
wae tare e+ depending on the sense of their rotation (sea
Fig. 18}.

The interface for the Mouse contains two counters for the x- and
y-coordinates. They are incremented or decremented whenever a
transition of the input signals occurs as indicated by the two
above sequences. A state machine registers the signal values
sampled at two consecutive clock ticks; a ROM is used to map
them Into the necessary counting pulses, .

9.6. The Monitor

wee we ee eee

The Monitor is an additional unit which is not present in the
computer under norma] circumstances, but for which nevertheless
a permanent slot is reserved, such that it can be Inserted any
time. It represents a small computer of its own, and it has the
capability to take full control over the Lilith processor. It is
therefore used for servicing when the Lilith hardware fatis, and
Et played a most crucial role during the entire development and
debugging phases of the Lilith computer.

The Monitor's heart is a Motorola 6882 one-chip microprocessor,
augmented by a 2K byte ROM and a 4K byte RAM, interface

===== PDF page 32 =====

- 34 -

registers to the Lilith hardware, and a serial line interface to
@ tecminal {UART). Its block diagram is given in Fig. 19. The
Monitor can

~ read the microinstruction register (MIR}

- supply the next microinstruction (disabling MIR)

- read the micro-program counter (2911)

supply the next instruction address {disabling 2911)
read the processor bus

feed data to the processor bus

disable the processor clock (hait)

send clock pulses (single or multiple step}

For debugging and servicing, an elaborate set of programa was
developed. In addition to a standard “operating system” residing
in the ROMs, test programs can be loaded into the RAM From 4
terminal, We extensively used an HP 26454 terminal with tape
cassettes as our programs library store. When a new Lilith
machine is to be tested, the Monitor is used ta Firat test the
MCU board, then to test the ALU board, thereafter the memory (in
conjunction with MCU and ALU), then the IfU, and Elinally the
interface boards. The Monitor nat only made a front panel
superfluous, but allowed the construction of the entire computer
with the aid of only an oscilloscope and, very rarely, a seall
legic state analyzer.

9.7. The physical layout

Nae Mma a st fd hh rt Sl ss Ag th a Mir te

The Lilith computer is designed to fit beside or underneath a
table on which the 15*~display, the keyboard, and the mouse are
Placed. The cabinet has a height of 274 cm; it is 43 cm wide and
55 cm deep. The disk cartridge is acceasible from the front.

The electronic components are placed on 18 boards housed in «2
cack with dimensions 42*35*3@ cm. One board each contains the
aicrocontrol unit, the arithmetic-logic unit, the processor part
and interfaces ta keyboard, mouse, and serial data line, the
instruction fetch unit, the display interface and the disk
interface. Four boards contain the main memory. Another board
Slot is reserved for a 24*49 microcode RAM, one for the Monitor,
and § slots are free for future experiments with other units or
interfaces. This makes the computer sultable as an object for
experimentation on the hardware as well as the software level.

The remaining space in the cabinet ia taken by the disk drive
and the power supply. Conventional linear power supplies were
built aftec several disappointing experiments with modern
switching power supplies that offer a much improved efficiency.

They turned out to be unable to cope with the European 228
Volts.

===== PDF page 33 =====

—~ Jl -

t@. Conclusions

ee eer

The personal computer leads to an entirely new computing
environment. Due to the high bandwidth of information between
its usec and his tool, a close interaction is possible that
cannot be provided by a central, remotely accessed Facility. The
personal computer [is much more than an “intelligent terminal",
because It puts the computing power near the user. A
particularly attractive feature is its constant availability,
and consequently the owner's independence of a computing
center’s service hours,

Interactive psage is of particularly high value in the
development of software, where text editing, compiling, and
testing are the prime activities. In our experience, a personal
computer increases the effectiveness of a competent software
engineer by an order of magnitude. 1! stress the attribute
“competent", for he needs the wisdom te leave his tool and
retreat to quiet deliberations when deeper problems of
algorithmic design appear. For the less competent engineer, the
personal computer amplifies the danger of seduction to
programming by trial and error (“hacking"}, a method that is
unacceptable in professional software engineering.

It has now become a widely accepted view that the software
engineet's notational tool aust be a high-level programming
language. When large, complex systems are the objective, the
tool must support modularization .and the specification of
interfaces. We have designed the tanguage Modula-2, a more
modern version of Pascal, with the principal addition of a
module Structure. Our implementation connects this feature with
the facility of separate compitation. Separate compilation,
however, is not independent compilation. On the contrary, the
compiler must fully check the consistency of the separately
compiled modules as if they wece written as a single plece of
text. The separation of global modules into definition and
implementation parts makes it possible to define those aspects
of a module that are significant for its clients apart from
those that are private to its implementation, It reinforces the
strategy of first breaking down a planned system {nto modules,
then to define their interfaces with the goal to keep them
“thin*, and finally to let the members of the programming team
implement the modules with relative independence.

The exclusive use of a high-level language makes it possible to
design «a computer architecture without regard of its
Suitability to assembler coding. The resulting architecture is
organized around a stack. The instruction set isa. designed to
provide a high density of code, largely due ta the use of
variable address length.

It fis particularly attractive to design such an architecture and


===== PDF page 34 =====

~ 32-

instruction set, if no conventional computer must be used for
its intecpretation. We have therefore also undertaken the design
of a hardware system with the purposes to interpret this code
etficiently and to accommodate the use of a high-resolution
display. The latter cequires a high memory bandwidth and bursts
of fast computation. The implementation of a microcoded
interpreter and the inclusion of a few special instcuctions for
bitmap handling appeacs to be an ideal solution. These
instructions correspond to aicrocoded routines that perform the
necessary bit-pushing with greatest efficiency.

AS an experiment ‘ta integrate the design of a programming
language ~- the software engineer's notational tool - the
development of its compller and environment, the dasign of a
computer architecture and instruction set, and the construction
of the hardware - the software engineer's physical tool - the
project has been successful and exciting. The resulting system
is, of course, not without its deficiencies. Our consolation is
that, 1f we did not know of items that should have been dane
differently, we would not have learned through our research.
Also, the project had to be conducted with severe restrictions
on manpower. This had the benefit that no significant management
problems were encountered.

As far as the hardware is concerned, an additional constraint
was the limited availability of modern technology. It was
therefore decided to rely on commercially available TTL chips
only, apact from MOS technology for the memory. The integrated,
top-down design from software to hardware outlined by this
project, isa especially relevant in view of the future role of
VLSI technology. Its unlimited possibilities cequire that = the
designer obtain new criteria guiding his objectives. The top-
down approach crossing the sof€t/hardware boundary tells the
hardware designer what is needed rather than the hardware
customer what is available. An aspect of this project that we
were unable to tackle was the design of LSI chips representing
the essential units of the Lilith computer, incorporating the
unconventional aspects af its architecture. The chip count (as
well as power supply problems) could thereby have been reduced
quite drastically. We hope that someone better equipped for the
task will pursue this challenge.

acknowledgements

Se ee er er

I welcome the opportunity to thank a1] those who contributed to
the success of this project, in particular those who suffered
through setbacks and lost neither the sight of its goal nor the
conviction of its worth. My thanks are due to the team members
L.Geissmann, A.Gorrengourt, J.Hoppe, Ch.Jacobi, §$.E. Knudsen,
T.Noack, Ch.Richner, and W.Winiger at ETH Zucich, and L.Binghas,
J.Wielson, and F.Ostler at BYU, Provo. I am particularly

===== PDF page 35 =====

- 3} »

indebted to R. COhran for his untiring enthusiasm and for not
giving up even in moments of despair. The idea that such a
project would be both worthwhile and feasible originated during
my sabbatical leave at the Xerox Palo Alte Research Center in
1976/77, and I am most grateful to Its staff members for many
inspiring ideas. 1 thank Ch.Geschke, 8.W,Lampson, J.Morris, and
E.Satterthwaite for convincing me that complex software was not
only needed but possible on small personal computers, and
B.M.McCreight for sticking te his belie£ that it was possible to
teach hardware design to a software type and for withholding his
plentyful knowledge of all the difficulties to be encountered.
Furthermore [I am grateful to J.D.Nicoud of ETH Lausanne for his
help in the design and for producing the Mouse. Finally £ wish
to acknowledge the financial support of ETH, making the entire
endeavour possible.

References

1. C.P. Thacker, E.M.McCreight, B.W. Lampson, R.F.Sproull,
D.R.Boggs. Alto: A personal computer. Xerex Palo Alto
Research Center. Report CSL-79-1T (1979) “

2. N.Wirth., <A personal computer designed for a high-level
language. In “Microcomputing’, W.Remmelte, H.Schecher, Eds.,
115-134, Stuttgart, 1979.

3. N.Wirth,. Modula-2. Institut fur Informatik, ETH. Report 36,
1988,

4. &.W.Lampson. An open operating system for a single-user
machine. Revue Francaise d‘Automatique. pp 5-38, Sept. 1975.

5. N.Wieth. Modula: A language for modular aultiprogramming,
Software - Practice and Experience, 7, 3-35. Jan.1977.

6. Ch.@,.Geschke, J.N.Morris, E.H.Satterthwaite. Early experience
with Mesa, Comm. ACM, 28, 8, 548~553, Aug. 1977.

7. L.Geissmann. Modulkonzept und separate Compilation in der
Programmiersprache Modula-2. In “Microcomputing", 98-114,
{see Ref,2)

8. H.C,Lauver, E.H.Satterthwaite. The impact of Mesa on system
design. Proc. Int'l Conf. on Software Engineering, Munich,
174-182, TEEE (1979).

8. D.D.Redell et al. Bllot: An operating system for a personal
computer. Comm.ACM 23, 2, 31-92 (Feb. 1989)

===== PDF page 36 =====

- 34 -

pee

MLkts schonashs ccc} anit

‘Mesles Zeetat®, tae cme

ublerache firme Oe

_ abe bt ave Aadang des Weg

jon? Diabe.°* wat Mans

ye veclebres. Ben Carce

Bet auth the wabett base feat Veretect ¥
met sre te marr wat
r +

ear waa O<blogrmph.s*° eo; (atin
” , — oht Thal, ne

tut: annnt [

| Untredectias
2, Praject Aielory and ever etme

Db. Manwlee end interfaces in Aoduled
. Seperate conptiatien af aodvles
B. The architecture of whe LITA ca
. The Utltth Nerdare aiructore

a: sities mG.8 Indus,
EaPOAT Quake Je FED
Resaint, wiselat, Or iteterd,

wWetiedet, wetienee, Witedir tng;

PRECERURE Aged tnt{ WAR Pe areata,
*F hi

wel tat Fae RGR

| bin Pore
aw coe = s

Berra Srtige

Fig. 1 Examples of displayed pictures in original
acrcen resolution.

===== PDF page 37 =====

- 35 -

TAA TRA

codeisveto
“Progam”

Loader invokes at Start of program at Termination of and
fevel t level 2 return Irom level 2

caL

FAA

Fig.2. Loading of program al level 2

===== PDF page 38 =====

- %-

space

SEK, senident modetes (sevet 0}

Fig.3. Typical sequence of program loadings

Tamie at
Black odds06sen

NameDirectory FileDuectory File Blocks

Fig.4. Storage layout on disk

===== PDF page 39 =====

- 37 -

Weangies vectors

Fig. 5. The three processes of Mcedos

Fig. 6. Procedure call hierarchy

===== PDF page 40 =====

Reyisters: u
G
$s
H
F
PC
P
M

Frame Ads Table

~ 8 -

poinies lo local data segment
poster to plobal dala segment
pointer to top of slack

pointer to stack limit

pointer lo current Code rama
pointer lo current instruction
power lo current process
interrupt mask

Fig. 7. The Lilith archiectue

===== PDF page 41 =====

m BQ ow

immediate n
global Gen
indirect Sena

Fig. 8. Lilith instruction formats

===== PDF page 42 =====

om £0 —

a ,
id
__d 18
ALU: Disp Mouse
Cut UART
16
0
aK x 40 |_|
ROM 12

Fi4. 9. Lilith hardware siructure

===== PDF page 43 =====

+ 3 3 3.62 4 4 2 4 1 3 tay, 8

1 3 3 3 2 4 4 2 4 1 3 74 4 4
1 12 8 § | 3 10

Osi, Fet, AS, A, B: 2901 cantral lields

PC: 2911 control field

SM, SC: Shilt mode and count

s: Stack enable

Fig. 10. The micro-instruction formats

===== PDF page 44 =====

= 42 -

i2
256 x12
iS a
MAP
ROM
ct

s Mask
Reg

|) decade
| and BUS
| fea | ax
Reg
tk

eee

ee ene ae

4x12
BAM

(stack}

Fig. 11. The Micra-Control Und

===== PDF page 45 =====

~ ade

16x16 p MUX

RAM

_ 18x16 FO
RAM
(stack)
ALU
Barret
DST « AL

trom mc

gate

DST«$¢

SAC a AL
BUS (16)

Fig. 12. The Arithmetic Logic Unit

===== PDF page 46 =====

~ 44 -

Fausias F4t S202

Fig. 13
The expression alack circuit

Gata Qut

===== PDF page 47 =====


===== PDF page 48 =====

FATE REQ

cin

3ST 1 MAR

fy Gus

SATE DATA
(

ad
30

ATA STROME

Re smd

-~ a6 -

Fig. 15. The bus to memory interlace and request arbisation circuit

cru net

Meh ADA

MEM PATA

===== PDF page 49 =====

~ 47 «

OTHER REQ |

CP REO

CPURDY

CPU SES

CLR

Fig. 16. Memory interlace signal timing

Ccrusus (16)

Fig. 17. The instruction letch unit

MEMADA MEM OATA

64

INSTN BUFFER

===== PDF page 50 =====

- (8 -

ing
™
2

-
“
a

2
»
z 2

con

x
2

ot

10

Fig. 18. The Mouse interface with «-countes

*

===== PDF page 51 =====

- 49 -

MonAdirBus (16)

Mea02 K x8
ROM Terminal
Ef MonDataBus 8

MIR uPC Bus Cantrol

Fig. 19. Monitor with 6802 microprocessor

===== PDF page 52 =====

rare

ter

- §3 ~

Appendix 1

—— eee ee

The M-code interpreter

Aa A ld He SY mle le SE lr AE i Ns

The following Madula-2 program interprets M-code Instructions
and serves as a high-level definition of the Lilith computec's
instruction set and architecture. A few comments are necessary
to cover details that are not fully described by the program.

1. The array variables stk and code stand for the data and
Program stores respectively. We assume that on an actual
computer they represent the SAME physical memory. The array
indices then denote memory addresses. Access to the code
involves the use of the base address F {and an 18-bit wide
addition}. -

2. Aki checks against arithmetic overflow, storage overflow, and
access with value NIL are omitted from the program in the
interest of clarity and in order not to obscure the essentials
of the interpretation algoritha.

3. Certain instructions are explained in loase English instead
of pracise Modula statements. Among them are the bitmap handling
instructions, which actually constitute fairly complex
aligorithas, and also operations like shifts, packing, and
unpacking, which ace considered as primitives, and hence not to
be defined contortiously in terms of even lower primitives.

4. The Functions low{d}), high({d}, and pairc(a,b) are introduced
to denote selection of a part of a double word and construction
of a double word. The functions Dtcunc and Dfloat dencte
conversion of floating-point values into double word integers
and vice-versa. All these functions sare NOT available in Modul a~-
2. Also, sets af the form {m..n} are used, although proper
Modula-2 does not allow expressions to be used within set
COnStructors.

5. The detalled specification cf 1/0 instructions ia suppressed.
It is considered not to be part of the genesal s-code
definition, but should be allowed to vary among differant
implementations according to the available hardware. This is
particularly true for the instructions DSKR, DSKW, SETAK used
for accessing the disk.

6. The Interrupt mechaniss is described in a cathec loose manner
and requires additional explanation: At the start of each
interpretation cycle, the Boolean variable REQ determines
whether or not an Interrupt cequest should be honoured. REQ
means “at least one of the unmasked intercupt lines {numbered
8...15) is low*. «If we denote the request lines by the set
variable ReqlLines and the presence-of a request on line 1 by

===== PDF page 53 =====

~ SI -

"NOT (1 IN RegLines)", then REQ can be expressed as
REQ = (Reqtines + Mask § {8 .. 15}}

The value Mask is the union of the mask register M and a
varlable called DevMask {Mask * M + DeviMask). This global
variable allows a program (typically the operating system} to
shut out any (or all) devices from interrupting. In the Lilith
computer, DevMask ils allocated in main memory at location 3. The
value ReqNo determines the interrupt line whese request is being
accepted. It determines the transfer vector used by the TRANSFER
operation. The value RegNo is defined as the maximum | such that
"NOT (i IN Reqlines + Mask).

Table of instructions

 haetnatiee hen taetee teeedealeentunluadianmeudiesdamdeeluadeataamany

a 4B ae 148 208 246 389 348
8 Lia Liw Low Lowe LSW READ FOR1 MOV
i LI} LLD LGD iLswl LSD WRITE FOR2 . CMP
2 LI2 LEW LGW2 LSW2 LSbs DSKR ENTC ooT
3 £13 LED LGW LSw3 LXFEW DS KW EXC | REPL
4 L114 LLW4 LGW4 Low4 LSTA SETRK TRAP. SBLT
5 Lis LEW5 LGWS5 Lows LxB UCHK CHK BCH
6 LI6é LEW§ LGW6 Lsw6 Lxw CHKZ UNPK
7 Li? LUW? LGW? Lsw? Lxb Sys CHKS PACK
i8 Lis LEwa LGW8 Lswa DADD ENTP EQL GB
HW urs LLW9 Lows LSw3 DSUB EXP NEQ . Gal
12 Lite LEW LGwla Lswid DMUL ULSS LSs ALOC
13 Litt LEwit LGW1] LSwt} POIV ULEO LEQ ENTR
14 LIt2 LLwi2 LGwl2 Lswte2 UGTR GTR RIN
5 LIt3 LLW13 LGwl3 tswt3 UGEQ GEQ cx
16 Lil LLWi4 LGWi4 LSwi4 DSRE TRA. ABS cI
V7 LPs LUWIS LGWI5 LSwWi5 DSHR RDS NEG cr
298 LIB SLW ScWw SSwa@ ssw LODFW oR CL
2) SLD SGD Sswt 88D LODFD XOR Cul
a2 Liw SEW SGW2 SSW2 SSbe STORE AND Ch2
23 Lio SED SGwW SSw3 SXFW STOFV COM CL
24 LLA SLw4 SGW4 ssw TS STOT IN CL4
25 LGA SLWS SGw5 SSW5 SXB copt LIN CL5
26 LSA SLW6 SGW6 SSW6 SxXW DECS MSK CL6
27 LEA SLWY SGW? SSW? SX PCOP NoT CL?
30 JPC Siwa SGwa Sswe8 FADD UADD ADD CLs
31 JP. Stwo SGW9 Ssw9 PSUs USUB Sus CLO
32 JPFC Stwig SGwis SSwig FAUL UMUL MUL CLI
33. JPF SLW1] SGwl} Sswit FDIV UDIV Div cuig
34 JPBC SLWI2 SGW12 SSH12 FCMP UMOD CLI2
35 JfB SLW13 SGW1} SSWI3 FAGS ROR Bit CLi3

===== PDF page 54 =====

36 ORIJP

SiLwig SGwl4

37 ANBJP Siwis SGWI5

Reserved

AW @ wh ow &

16,17
28,21
22,23

nae

36,37

{init

locations:

(vo register of module 8)
alization flag of module 8)
{string painter of module @}
device magk
P-register

saved P-register
boot flag

trap vector
intercupt vector
interrupt vector

interrupt vector

4%..177 data Frame table

MODULE Interpreter;

CONST tlc = 168;
aft = 408;
VAR (*global state variables*)
nae PC: CARDINAL;
IR: CAADINAL;
F: CARDINAL;
G: CARDINAL;
H: CARDINAL;
Li CARDINAL;
S: CARDINAL;
P: CARDINAL;
M: BITSET;
REQ: BOOLEAN;

ReqNo: CARDINAL;

PEG SHL NOP cLl4
FFCT SHR MOVE CLS

for Line 8 (clock)
for llne 9 (disk}

for line 15

(*N.Wicth, Ch.Jacobi; Feb.al*)

i*trap location adr*}
({*data frame table adr*)

i*program counter*)
(*instruction register*)
{*code frame base address*}
(*data frame base address*)
d*stack Limit address*}
(*local segment address*}
(*stack poincar*)

(*procese base addresa*)
(*process interrupt mask*)
(*interrupt request*)
(*request oumber, &..15*)

{*auxiliary variabies used over single instructions only*)
1, }, kz CARDINAL;
$z, adr, low, hi: CARDINAL; (*used in FOR, ENTP, PCOP*)
sb, db, sbmd, dbmd, fo: CARDINAL; (*display handling*)
x, ys REAL; .

stk: ARRAY (#..1777776] OF CARDINAL, (*data store*)

MODULE InstructionFetch;
IMPORT &,PC;
EXPORT next, next2;

VAR code: ARAAY [@..777778] OF {@..255);

===== PDF page 55 =====

- §3 -

PROCEDURE next): CARDINAL;
BEGIN

INC (PC); RETURN code[4*F#Pc-1])
END next;

PROCEDURE next2()}: CARDINAL; (*get next two code bytes*}

BEGIN .

INC {PC, 2); RETURN code[4*F+pc-2]*489B + code[4*F+Pc-1]
END next2;

END InstructionFetch;

MODULE ExpressionStack; .
EXPORT push, pop, Dpush, Dpop, empty;

VAR sp: CARDINAL;
a: ARRAY [(8..15} OF CARDINAL; {*expressian stack*}

PROCEDURE push{x: CARDINAL);
BEGIN afsp] :* x; INC{sp)
END push;

PROCEDURE pop(}: CARDINAL;
BEGIN DEC(sp); RETURN(a[sp}}
END pop;

PROCEDURE Dpush(d: REAL); .
BEGIN afsp} := high{d); INC(sp}; afsp} := low{d); INC(sp)
END Dpush;

PROCEDURE Dpopi(): REAL;
BEGIN DEC{sp,2); RETURN pair(a[sp], a{sp+1]})
END Dpop;

PROCEDURE empty{} : BOOLEAN;
BEGIN RETURN sp = @
END empty;

BEGIN sp := @;
END ExpressionStack;

PAOCEDURE mark({x: CARDINAL; external: BOOLEAN);
VAR i: CARDINAL;
BEGEN i := 8;
stk(S] := x; INC{S}); (*static Link*)
stk([S} := &; INC(S};  (*dynamic link*)
IF external THEN
stk(S) s:=* PC+190800B ELSE stk({S} := PC
END ;
INC(S,2); Lo:= 1
END mark;

PROCEDURE saveEx pStack;

===== PDF page 56 =====

- 54 -

VAR c: CAADINAL;
BEGIN c :* @; (*expression stack counter*}
WHILE NOT empty() DO
stk{S] <= pop(); INCES); INC(c);
END 3
atk{S) := c; INC{S)
END saveExpStack,;

PROCEDURE rcestoreExpStack;
VAR c: CARDINAL;
BEGIN DEC(S); c :* stk{S};
WHILE co’ BO
DEC(c); DEC(S}; pushistk(s])
END
END restoreExpStack;

PROCEDURE saveRegs;
BEGIN saveExpStack;
Stk[P jo s= G; stk(Pel] :=-L;
$tk(P+2] :* PC; stk{P+3] := CARDINAL(M);
etk{P¢4) :* 6; stk[p+S] := H+24;
(* stk{e+6} is reserved for error code *}
(* sckf{Pp¢?] is veserved for error trap mask *)
END saveRegs;

PROCEDURE restoreRegs(changeMask: BOOLEAN);
BEGIN
G r= sck({Pj; F ss stk(G};
& s* stk(Ptt]; PC s= stk{P+2};
If changeMask THEN M :* BITSET(stk(P+3})) END ;
S s= sck{P+4]; s™ stk(P+5)~-24;
restoreExpStack
END restoreRegs;

PROCEDURE Transfer (changeMask: BOOLEAN; ta, from: CARDINAL);
VAR 4: CARDINAL;

BEGIN
j i= stk(to}]; saveRegs; stk{from) ;= P;
Poss j; cestoreRegs (changeMask)

END Transfer;

PROCEDURE Trap(n: CARDINAL);
BEGIN
TF MOT (n IN BETSET(stk[®+7})) THEN
Stk{P+6) s*= n;
Transfer (TRUE, Lic, tle+1)
END
END Trap;

BEGIN (* readBootPile *}
Po :* stk(4); cestoreRegs (TRUE);
Loop

IF REQ THEN Transfer (TRUE, 2*Reqno, **ReqNo+l) END ;

===== PDF page 57 =====

- §5 -
IR := next);
CASE IR OF
OB .. V7B: (*LI# - LI15 load immediate*) push{IR MOD 16) |
285: (*LIB load immediate byte*}) push{next()) |
228: (*LIW load immediate word*) push(next2{)) |
238: (*®LED load immediate double word*}
push(next2()); push(next2¢))} |
248: (*LLA toad local address*} push{L+next{)} |
258: {*LGA load global address*}) push(G+next{)} }
268: (*LSA load stack address*} pushi(popi)tnext()) |
27B: (*LEA load external address*}
push(stkdft+next(}}+next{)}) {
30B: (*JPC jump conditional*)
IF pop() = @ THEN PC ¢= PC + next2(}
ELSE INC{(PC,2)
END |
318: (*3P jump*) PC := PC + next2{) |
32B: {*J3PFC jump forward conditional*)
IF pop() = @ THEN PC := PC + next{) ELSE INC(PC) END }
338: (*JPF jump forward*) PC := PC + next{}) = |
34B: (*JPBC jump backward conditionalt}
IF pop(} = @ THEN PC := PC - next(} ELSE INC{®PC}) END
358: (*3PB jump backward*} PC := PC - next{} |
368: (*ORJP short circuit OR *)
IF popi}) = & THEN INC(PC)
ELSE push(t); PC :* PCtnext()}
END |
378: {*ANDIP short circuit AND *)
I? popt} = @ THEN push(#}); PC := PC+next(}
ELSE INC {PC}
END |
488; (*LLW load local word*) push({stk[L+next(})])) = |
41¥B: (*LLD load lecal double word*)
i := Ltnexti); push(stk{i}}; push(stkf{i+1}) |
42B: (*LEW load external word*}

===== PDF page 58 =====

- 56 ~

push(stk[stk{dfittnext(}Jenext()i) |
438: (*LED load external double word *)

f s= stk(d€ttnext())tnext();

push(sck(i}); push(sck(i+t}) f
448 .. S7R: (*LEW4-LLWI15*) push{(atk({L + (IR MOD 16)1} |
64B;: (*StW store jJocal word*} stk(Linexei))] := popi) |

61B: ¢€*SLD store local double word*)
Loss Lenext(); stk{ish]-:= pop); stk{i}] s= pop) |

62B: ("SEW store external word*)
atk[stk[dftineat())tnext()} s= pop{) |

638: (*SED store external double word *)
io s= sck{d€t+enext{j]tnext();
stk(i+t) := pop(); stk[ i] := pop() |

648 .. F7B; {*SL~LW4-SLW15) store local word*)
SCk[L#€1R MOD 16)§ := popt)

1885; (*LGW load global word") push(stk{[G+next()}) !

WIB: (*LGD load global double word*}
if ss next()4G; push(stk{ij}; push(stkQiel}) |

1928 .. 1178s (*LGW2 ~ LGWI5 load giobal word*)
push(stk(G + (IR MOD 16}})

¥2@B; (*SGW store global word*) stk[Gtnext{)} <= popi) |

1218: (*SGD store global double word*)
i s= Gtnext{}; stk{it+i}] := pop(); stkQi) += pept} |

1228 .. 137B: (*SGW2 - SGWI5 store global word*}
stk{G + {IR MOD 16)]) := pop()

1408 .. 157B: (*LSWa ~- LSWIS load stack addressed word*}
pushistk(pop()+(IR MOD 16})3) E

1608 .. 1778: (*SSWS - SSWI5S store stack~-addressed word")
k :* pop(}; i s* pop{})+(iR MOD 16}; stk{i] := k f

2938: (*LSW load stack word*)
i :* pop({) + next{j); push(sck£i}) |

291B: (*LSD load stack double word*)
f s* pop() + next(); push(stk{i}}; push(sck[ie¢t}) |

2038; ({*LXFW load indexed frame word*}
k := pop() + pop()*4; pusn(sck{k}]) |

===== PDF page 59 =====

202B;

2948:

2058:

2868;

2078:

2188:

201B:

212B:

2138:

2168:

207B:

2208:

2218:

2228:

223B:

- $7 -

(*LSO@ load stack double word*)

i s= pop(); push(stk{i}}); push(stk{i+1]}) |

(*LSTA load string address *) push({stk(G+2)#next()}

{*Lx8 load indexed byte*)

i s= popt}; j := popt):; k s= stk[} + (i DIV 2))];

tf i MOD 2 = @ THEN push(k DIV 4688)
ELSE push(k MOD 46¢B)
END |

(*LXW load indexed word*}
i := pop()+pop(}); pushistk[il) 1

{*LxXD load indexed double word *)}

i s= 2*popi}+pop(); push(stk{i]); push(stk{i+1})

(*DADD double add. Subsequent operators for double
words denote unsigned fixed-point arithmetic,
although the program shows REAL operands*)

y :* Dpop({); x :* Dpop(); Dpush(xty) |

(*DSUB double subtract*)
y «* Dpop{); x :* Dpopt); Dpush{x-y) |

(*OMUL double amultiply*)

jo:* pop(); f := popt); (* x :=* i*j *) Dpush(x) 1

{*DDIV double divide*)
3} := pop{); « := Dpop();

P
{* k := x Div rT i z:=~ x MOD j *) push{ip; push{k)*

(*pSsul double shift left*)

x :™ Dpop(); (*shift x left 1 bit*) Dpush{x) 1

{*DSHR double shift right*)

x := Dpop(}; (*shift x right 1 bit*) Dpush{x)} |

(*SSW store stack word*)

k r= popt}); i := pop()t+next(); stkfi] s= k |

(*S5SD stoce stack double word*}

k := pop(}; } := pop{); if " pop(j+next();

stkGi] c= jy stk itt] := k

(*SSD@ store stack double word*}

ko sm pop(); jo := pop(); i == popt);
atkEi] ss j, stklitt) = k 1

(*SXFW store indexed frame word*)
1 i= pop{); k s= pop() + pop()*4; stkik}

===== PDF page 60 =====

22465:

225B:

226B:

2278:

2388:

23TB:

2328;

2338;

2348;

2358:
236B:
2378:

2488;

2418:

- 58 -

{*TS test and sat*)
i :* pep(); push(sck(i}; etki] 29 1 }

(*SeB store indxed byte*)
k i= pop()s; i t= pop(}; j := popi) + (1 DIV 2);
IF i MOD 2 = @ THEN |

ack(j] := k*466B ¢ (stk{4) MOD 48@B)
ELSE etki jl t= (atk(jj) DIv 4998) * agen + k
END

{*SxW store indexed word*)
k s* pop{); i t= popti+popt(); stkfi} se k |

(*SXD store indexed double word*)

ko s= pop(); j := popt{); 4 := 2*pop{)+pop();
Stk€hi}] s= jy wtkQ lel] «= k }

(*PADD ficating add*)
y += Dpop(); x t= Dpopi}); Dpush(xty) |

{*FSUB floating subtract*)
y == Dpop(); x t= Dpopt{); Dpushix-y) |

(*FMUL floating multiply*)
y :* Dpop(); x t= Dpop{); Dpush(xty) |

{*FDIV Floating divide*)
y == Dpop(); a := Dpop{); Dpush{x/y) |

(*FCMP Floating compare*)

x := Dpop()s y-:= Dpop();

If x > y THEN push(®); push(1}
ELSIF x < y THEN push{1}3; push(6}
puse push(§); push(#)

END

(*FABS floating absolute value*) Dpush(ABS(Dpop(})} 1
(*PNEG floating negative*} Dpush(-Dpopt()) |

(*FFCT floating functions*}) £ s= nexti);
IP i=@ THEN Dpush (FLOAT I pop{())}
ELSIF i=} THEN Dpush{DPloat(Dpop{)))
ELSIF 1=2 THEN push(TRUNC (Dpop{})}
arid i=} THEN Dpush(Dtrunc{Dpop{}, popt)))

(*READ*) 4 s= pop(); k :© popt{);
d* stk({i] := input from channel k *} |

k t= popt)

(*WRITE*®} & 3= pop(); ;
ut i to channel k *) }

(* outp

===== PDF page 61 =====

24281
2438:
2448:
2458:

2478:

2588:

2518;
2528;

253B:

2548:

2558:

2568:

257B:

26BB:

2616:

2628:

26368:

2646:

2658:

(*BSKR disk read*) |
(*DEKW diak weitet) |

t*SETRK set disk track*) |

(*UCHK*) k := pop(); j s= pop(); i := pop(); push(il;
IF (i < j) OR ({ > k) THEN Trapi4) END |

(*SYS rarely used system functions*) |

(*ENTP entry priority*}
stk{L+3]}] := CARDINAL(M); M t= [@..next{)-t} |

(*EXP exit priority*) M := BITSET(Stk{L+3]) |

(*ULSS*} j := pop(); i := pop{);
If i < } THEN push(}) ELSE push(@) END 1}

(*ULEQ*) J := pop(); £ := pop{);
IP i <= 4 THEN push(1) ELSE push(@) END |

(*UGTR*) 9 := popt); i := popt);
IF i > j THEN push{1) ELSE push(@} END }

(*UGEQ*) 4 := popt); f := popt);
If 1 >= j THEN push(1) ELSE push(@) END } —

{*TRA coroutine transfer*)
Transfer (BOOLEAN{next(}),. popl}, popt)) |

{*RDS rcead string*) k = pop{}; £ :* next(};
REPEAT

stk[k] :* next2()3 INC (k)}); DEC(1)
UNTIL if < 8 |

{*LODEFW reload stack after function rceturn*)
i s= popt{}); restoreExpStack; push{i) |

(*LODFD reload stack after function return*)
i := pop(); j := pop(); restoreExpStack;
push{j); push(i) |

(*STORE*) saveExpStack |

(*STOFV store stack with Formal procedure on top*)
i :* pop{}; saveExpStack; stk{S} := 1; INC{S) |

{*sToT copy From stack to procedure stack*)
stk{S} := pop(}); INC({S) |

¢*COPT copy element on top of expression stack*}
i s= pop(); push(i}; push{!i) |

===== PDF page 62 =====

2668:
2678;

2708:
271B:
2728;
2738:
274B;
2758;

2768:

277B:;

3208:

301B:

3928;

- 68 -

(*DECS decrement stackpointer*®*) DEC(S} j

{*PCOP allocation and copy of value parameter *)
StkiLenext(}] := $;
SZ := pop(}; k 3: Stszz; adr := pop{};
WHILE sz>@ bBo

stk{S} := stkfadr}; INC({S); INC(adr); DEC(sz}
END |

(*UADD*) j :* popi); i z= pop(); push(i+j) |
(*uSuB*) 3 s= popi}; i 2= pop); push{i-4}) |
(*UMUL*) j z= pop(); i s= popi); push(i*}) |
(*UDIVe) j := pop(}; 1 == popt(); pushit DIV 4) |}
(*UMOD*) 4} := popid); i := pop(); push({i MOD j) |

(*ROR*) j = pop(); i z= pop{) MOD 16;
(*k se j rightrotated by i places *) push(k) ]

(*SHL*) dos { := pop{) mop
(* ko sw 4 le€e Pal teed by 1 places *) een ik) j

(*SHR*) Jj s= pop(d; i :* popt) MOD 16;
(ik s= j right Penieted by i places*) pushi(k) |

(*FORI enter FOR statement *}
i s= mext(); (* =@: up; >@: down *)
hi z= popt); low z= popi); adc := popl)s
k ¢* PC + next20i
T? (({i = @) AND tlow <= hi)} Of
(th @ £4) AND (low >= hi})} THEN

Stkfadr] := low;

stk(S} :* adey; INC{S); atk{S} s= hi; INC{S)
ELSE (* don’t execute the FOR loop *)

(*POR2 exit FOR statement *)
hi := stk(S-1}; adc :* stk{S-2];
SZ t= INTEGER{mextid); (* step cange -128..4927 *}
k z= PC + mext2(); f := stklade]+s2z;
IF ((s2 >= 6) AND (i > hid)
OR ((sz2 <= @) AND (i < td))
THEN (* terminate *} DEC(S, 2)
ELSE (* continue *}) stkladr] :* i; PC := k
END }

(*ENTC enter CASE statement*}
PC z= PC + mext2(); k := pop();

===== PDF page 63 =====

3838:

384B:

3858:

366B:

3078:

31 8B:

3UtB:

3126:

3136:

31 4B:

3V5B:

3168:
3178:

~ 6] =

low := newt2(); hi y= next2();
stk{S} :* PC + 2*{hi-low) + 4; INC{S);
IF (k >= low) AND (k <= hi} THEN
PC := PC + 2% (k-lowtt)
END;
PC := PC # next2() |

(*EXC exit CASE statement®) DEC(S); PC := stk[{S} |
(*TRAP*) & z= pop{); Trap(i) 1

(*CHK*) k := pop(); j := pop(); i := pop{}); push(i);
IF (INTEGER(3) < INTEGER(})) OR
({INTEGER(i) > INTEGER(k)}) THEN Trap{4} END 1

{* CHKZ*)}
k i= pop(); i := pop{); push({i);
IF i>k THEN Trap(4} END [

(*CRKS check sign bit*}
k := pop(}); push(k);
IF INTEGER{k) < ® THEN Trap(4). END |

(*EQL*)) 5 :=* pop(); i := popl};
IF i = j THEN push(1) ELSE push(@} END f{

(*NEQ*) j :* pop(); i r= pop{);
If i § j THEN push(1) ELSE push{a} END |

(*L£SS*} j := pop{); 1 := pap);

IF INTEGER(1) < INTEGER(}) THEN
push(1} ELSE push(@)

END |

(*LEQ*) 3 := pljz i :* pop():

YF INTEGER(!) mee INTEGER{3} THEN.
push(1} ELSE push(#}

END {i

(*GTR*) j :* pop(}); 1 := popt};

IF INTEGER(i) > INTEGER{}j) THEN
push(l) ELSE push{@)

END |

(*GEQ*) j := popt); i := popt);

IF INTEGER{1i} >= INTEGER (5) THEN
push(1} ELSE push{é@}

END |}

(*ABS*) =«push{ABS (INTEGER {pop()}}) 1

(*NEG*) push{-INTEGER(pop())) |

===== PDF page 64 =====

3208:

3218;

3228;

- 3238:

3248;

3258:

326B:
3278:

3308;
3318;
3328;
3336:
334B:

3358:
3366:
3378:

3408;

(*OR*)

(*XOR*)

{*AND*)

(*COM*)
€*IN*).

- £2 -

j i= pop(); i s= popt):
push (CARDINAL (BITSET(1} #BITSET (4) )} i

jo :* pop{); i += popt};
push (CARDINAL (BITSET (1) /BITSET(})}) |

J := pop(}; £ z= popid:
push (CARDINAL (BITSET (i) *BITSET(4))) |

push (CARDINAL((8..15}/BITSET(pop()}})}) |

j= pop(); i := popt);

IF i > 15 THEN push(¢)
ELSIF i IN BITSET(}} THEN push{}}
ELSE push(¢)

END |

(*LIN load immediate NIL*} push(1777778) j

(*MSK*)}
(*NOT*)

(*ADD*)

{*SUB*)

{*MUL*)

(*DIV*)

(*mOD*)

(*BIT*)

(*HOP*)

j += pop() MOD 16; push(CARDINAL({@..k-2})) 1
4 t= pop(); push{CARDINAL(({15}/{(j})) |

J := pop(); i i= popih;
push(CARDINAL( INTEGER (1) + IMTEGER(3))) I

J i= popt)s t z= popt)
push (CARDINAL (INTEGER (1) + INTEGER($))) |

j :™ pop(); 1! := popt);
push (CARDINAL ( INTEGER (1) * INTEGER({)}) |

j i* pop(}; i := pop{);
push (CARDINAL ( INTEGER (i) Div INTEGER(4))) |

j t= popt); i := popt);
push (CARDINAL (INTEGER(i} MOD INTEGER (3))3 |

j = popi) MOD 16; i* k s= (fj) *) push(k> |

{(*MOVF move frame *) i := pop();
j :* popl}+pop()*4; (*18 bits#)

k :* pop{)+pop()*4; (*18 bits*}
WHILE i>@ DO

stkik]}
END |

z= stk(j}s INC(k); INC(}); DEC{1)

(*MOV move block*}

k 3* pop(}; Fd i; 2
WHILE k>@ in! Pol Poet):

stk{i]

= stk{j)s; INCCL); INC(4); DEC{k)

===== PDF page 65 =====

3498:

342B:

3438;

3448:

345B;

3468:

347B:

356B:

351B:
3528:

- 63 -

END }

(*CMP compare blecks*}
k s™ pop(); j := popt); i z= popt);
IF k=9 THEN push(@); push(@)
ELSE
WHILE({stk{i} §& stk(j}) AND tk > B) DO
EINC(i}s INC( 4); DEC(k)
END;
pushi(stk({ ij}; push{stk[4))
END |

(*DOT display dot*)

k := pop(); j :* popt); dbmd := pop(); i := pop{)

(* display point at <j,k> in mode i inside
bitmap dbmd *) |

(*REPL replicate pattern *)

db := pop(); sb := pop{); dbmd := pop(); i :* pop()

{* replicate pattern sb over block db inside
bitmap dbmd in mode i *} j

(*BBLT bit biock transfer*}
sbmd := pop(}; db := pop{): sb <= pop{);
dbmd := pop({); 1 := popt) sR
{(* transfer block sb in bitmap sbwd to block db
inside bitmap dbmd in mode 1! *) Lie
(*DCH display character*)
j += pop{); db := pop({); fo :* pop(); dbmd := pop()
{* copy bit pattern for character j from font fo
to bleck db inside bitmap dbmad *)} |

(*UNPK unpack*) k := pop(); j t= pop(); f = pop);

(*extract bits i..j from k, then right adjust*)

push{k) | .

(*PACK pack*)

k := pop(); J := pop(); i := pop{); adc := pop();

(*pack the rightmost j-i+) bits of k into positions
{..J of word stk{adr} *) |

(*GB get base adr n levels down*}
iss hz Jo := next );
REPEAT
{ s= stkfi}; DEC{}}
UNTIL j=0;
push(i) 1

(*GB)} get base adr 1 level down*) push{stk{L}) |

(*ALLOC allocate block*)
{ := pop(); push(S5}; S := S + f;

===== PDF page 66 =====

= 64 -

IF S > # THEN S c= pop(); Trap(3) END |

3538: (*ENTR enter procedura*}
i ss mnext(); S t= Sei;
{fF S > 0 THEN S :* 5-1; Trap {3} END |

354B: ({*RTW ceturn from procedure*})
S$ :* by CL ys stk[S+l]}; i tw stk{St+2]},
TF i < 1@@9@@8 THEN PC := i
ELSE G := stk(S]; Fo:= atk{G}; PC := 1 - lsaegan
END |

3558; (*Cx call external procedure*}
jo :* mext(); bo: next);
mark(G, TRUE); G s= stkidfe+});
Fos* etk(G}; PC s= 29h; PC s= next2ai)  )

3568: (*CI call proceduce at intermediate level*}
i x= nexti(}); mark(pop{), FALSE);
PC := 213 PC c= next2() |

3578: (*CF call formal procedure*)
ios stk[S-l]}; mark{G, TAUE);
3} z= 1 DIV 4208; G z= atkfdtt+jl;
cr FF s= stk([G}; PC cw 2°¢1 BOD 4008); PC s= next2{) i

_ 3688: (*CL call local procedure*}
§ s* next(); mark(L, FALSE);
PC 3 2e1; PC :=™ nent2() |

3618 .. 3778: (*Chl - CLIS call local procedure*)
mack(L, FALSE); PC z= 2*{IR MOD 16); 7 next2()
END
END (*LOOP*)
END Interpreter.

===== PDF page 67 =====

- 65 -

Appendix 2

ste le ty te ete ts te in

ee ee ee ee ee eee eee

In order to provide a basis for measuring and comparing the
efficiency of implementations of the language Modula-2, a
benchmark program is proposed. It measures selectively various
specific language features. Instead of relying on a bulit-in
timing mechanism (which depends on an underlying operating
system and quite likely impedes the program’s portability), the
program merely counts the number of times certain statements are
executed. Computation is monitored and interrupted by the human
operator equipped with a step watch. Each test is selected by
typing its identifying character {a - o); the end of the test is
signalled by typing any character. Further detatls are to be
derived from the program listing. :

The following Figures have been measured for the Lilith, the
PDP-11/48, and the Xerox Alto 2 computers. {On the Alto, the
program was translated into Mesa}. The timing. period is 1
minute for each test. Implementors of Modula-2 are encouraged to
apply this test fully or partially to their system and to let us
know their results.

facility Lilith PDP-11/48 Alto 2

a empty REPEAT locp 321 184

b empty WHILE loop 334 185 116
c empty FOR loop 422 238 172
d CARDINAL arithmetic 187 84 54
@ REAL arithmetic 138

f sin, exp, In, sqrt 87

g array access 103 54 32
h same with bounds tests 89 11 26
i matrix access 197 93 44
3 same with bounds tests 164 ‘21 36
k cal} of empty procedure 144 37 40
1 with 4 parameters 94 29 32
m copying arrays 63 11 56
mn access via pointers 125 66 54
a reading a disk stream 267 36

===== PDF page 68 =====

~ 66 -

MODULE Benchmark;
i*$T-
a: empty REPEAT loop
b: empty WHILE loop
ci empty FOR loop
a: CARDINAL arithmetic
@: REAL arithmetic
f: standard functions
g: array of single dimension
h: same as g but with index tests
i: matcix access
: Same as i but with index tests
s call of empty, pacameteriless procedure
1: call of empty procedure with 4 parameters
am: copying acrays {block moves)
ni pointer chaining
o: reading of File *)

FROM Storage IMPORT ALLOCATE;
FROM Terminal IMPORT Read, BusyRead, Write, WriteLln;
FROM InOwt IMPORT WriteCard;
FROM FileSystem IMPORT
File, Lookup, ReadWord, Reset, Response;
FROM MathLibS IMPORT sin, exp, In, sqrt;

TYPE NodePtr = POINTER TO Node;
Node » RECORD x,y: CARDINAL; next: NodePtr END ;

VAR A,B,C: ARRAY [#..255} OF CARDINAL;
M: ARRAY [9..99},{8@..99] OF CARDINAL;
m: CARDINAL; head: NodePcr;

PROCEDURE Test{ch: CHAR);
VAR 1,3,k: CARDINAL;
r@, ch, c2: REAL; p: NodePtr;

PROCEDURE P;
BEGIN
' END P;

PROCEDURE Q(x,y.Z.wt CARDINAL);
BEGIN
END Q;

BEGIN
CASE ch OF
“a"°: k s* 28008;
REPEAT
k z= k-1l
UNTIL k = @ ]

*b": i s= 28808;
WHILE i > @ DO

===== PDF page 69 =====

"oF:

"a" :

bolt tad :

*i*;

"3":

"k's

wats

~ 67 »

fora j-1
END |

FoR i := 1 TO 268808 DO
END |

jo:= @; k <= 1a86¢;
REPEAT -

kore k-by oj os= jet; fo osm (k*3) DIV (4*5)
UNTIL k = 6 |

k := $608; rl o:* 7.28; r2 ¢= 34.8;
REPEAT

kot@ keds cB s= (r1*e2) f/f Cetera):
UNTIL k = 8 | ,

k := 580;
REPEAT c@ := sin(@.7); rio s* expt(2.a);

rO8o:@ In(18.0); clo s= sqrtqlea.Bp; ko s= k~-
UNTIL k = @ |

: k = 29088; 1 := 8; B[G}) := 73;

REPEAT .
A[il := BEI}: BEi} s= ALE]: k se k+1
UNTIL kK = a | ;
C*ST+*) ko s= 20006; i s= 8; BIB) s* 737
REPEAT
Afi] := Bli}; Bi) := ALi}; k t= k-1
UNTIL k=#® (*$T-*) f

For i := @ TO 99 DO
FOR j := @ TO 99 DO
MEi,3) s= (3,4)
END

END |

(*$T+*)
FOR i := @ TO 99 pO
FOR j := 6 TO 99 DO
MLi,j] :* MUj,2]
END
END {*$T-*) |

k := 29996;
REPEAT

P; k x= k-1
UNTIL kK = @ |

ho os* 25888;
REPEAT

Oai.p.k am); k := k-}
UNTIL ke = # |

===== PDF page 70 =====

“m™: k := 58;
REPEAT
ko osm k-iz Asa By B se Cs; C xs A
UNTIL k «= # 1

Pn": k zs 58@;
REPEAT p := head;
REPEAT P i= p*.next UNTIL p = NIL;

UNTIL k = 8 j
*o"; k := S08;

REPEAT
k s:= k-ly ReadWord{f,i)
UNTIL k = @;
Reset (f}
END
END Test;

VAR ch,chi: CHAR;
mi CARDINAL;
f; File;
q: WodePtr;

BEGIN Lookup(f,"anyFile", FALSE);
head t= MIL; n c= 1885
REPEAT q <= head;
MEW (head); head” .next := gz no s= n-}
UNTIL n = 6;
Weite({">"}) Readich};
WHILE ("a° <# ch) & (ch < "p*} DO
Weite(ch), Writein; a s= &;
REPEAT n := ntl; Teetich);
TF {nm MOD 58) = & THEN WriteLn END ;
Write(".°}; BusyRead(chl)
UNTIL chi § @C;
WeiteCard(n,6)}; Writein; Wreite(">"°); Read{ch)
END ;
Wr ite(i4c)
END Senchaark.
